+++

tags:
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"
- "neikos &#39;quarrel&#39;"
- "dais &#39;feast, division of portions (of meat); sacrifice&#39;"
- "&#39;best of the Achaeans&#39;"
- "mētis ‘mind, intelligence’"
- "biē ‘force, violence, strength’"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.8.75-8.78.Wjo9MMu"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:8.75-8.78"
title: "Odyssey 8.75-78"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>The narrative subject of the epic that is being paraphrased here is a <em>neikos</em> ‘quarrel’ between Odysseus and Achilles, O.08.075. And the setting for this quarrel is a <em>dais</em> ‘feast’ that is explicitly correlated with a ‘sacrifice’, O.08.076: θεῶν ἐν δαιτὶ θαλείῃ ‘at a celebratory feast [<em>dais</em>] of the gods’. The same epithet <em>thaleiēi</em> (θαλείῃ) is also used to describe the ongoing <em>dais </em>‘feast’ at O.08.099. This epithet is of special interest in light of the meaning of the noun <em>thaliai</em> in the plural, ‘celebrations, festivities’, as at O.11.603 (HPC 85n13). We may compare another feast, described at I.08.228–235, where the describer is Agamemnon, recalling a scene from the collective past of the Achaeans: the setting of this other feast was the island of Lemnos, and each one of the Achaean leaders took turns in boasting that he was the best Achaean of them all, I.08.229. In my comment on I.08.228–235, I noted that the noun <em>eukhōlai</em> ‘boastings’ in the plural at I.08.229 indicates a distributive action: the Achaeans were boasting not as a group but individually and competitively. The competitive boasting evidently centered on the question: who would be superior to all others in performing heroic exploits in the upcoming Trojan War? And the setting for this quarrel was a feast where the meat of oxen to be eaten in vast quantities was being apportioned among the Achaean leaders, I.08.231. Since the narrative here makes a point of adding that these leaders were also drinking wine, I.08.232, it is implied that all the boasting could get out of hand and lead to quarrels about the awarding of prime cuts of meat. It would have been expected that the best portion of meat should go to the best hero. On the idea of a champion’s portion of meat, see the comment on I.07.319–322. Having reconstructed for I.08.228–235 a scene of quarreling in the context of apportioning cuts of meat, I return to the scene at O.08.075–078, where we see once again a scene of quarreling in the context of apportioning cuts of meat. And here the ‘quarreling’ is explicitly called a <em>neikos</em>, O.08.075, while the ‘apportioning of meat’ is explicitly called a <em>dais</em>, O.08.076. As we saw in the comment for I.01.423–425, a <em>dais</em> is a feast where meat is distributed, and this meat comes from the sacrifice of sacrificial animals. Thus the act of sacrifice converts the feast of humans into a notional feast of the gods. This notion, ‘feast of the gods’, is made explicit at O.08.076, where the setting is described explicitly this way, as we have already seen: θεῶν ἐν δαιτὶ θαλείῃ ‘at a celebratory feast [<em>dais</em>] of the gods’. In this festive setting, as I already highlighted in the comment on I.08.228–235, the <em>neikos</em> ‘quarrel’ at O.08.075 is between Odysseus and Achilles, who are described at O.08.078 as ‘the best of the Achaeans’. In terms of such a dispute in the context of a feast, each one of the two heroes would be claiming to be the ‘best of the Achaeans’. Achilles would have claimed to be ‘best’ because of his superior <em>biē</em> ‘force, violence, strength’, while Odysseus would have counter-claimed to be ‘best’ because of his superior <em>mētis</em> ‘mind, intelligence’. See the comments on O.01.002; see also, further back, the comments on I.01.001–012, where I argue that the quarrel between Odysseus and Achilles came from an epic tradition that was independent from the epic tradition that featured the quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles. Further, see the comment on I.09.346–352, where I note that this Iliadic passage was thought by Aristarchus (scholia A for I.09.347) to be an allusion to the quarrel at O.08.075–078 between Achilles and Odysseus over one overriding question: will Troy be conquered by relying on the physical power of Achilles or on the mental power of Odysseus? </p>