+++

tags:
- "prooimion ‘proemium, prelude’"
- "oimē ‘thread, story-thread’"
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.8.74.hRX4pgQ"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:8.74"
title: "Odyssey 8.074"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>I translate the genitive of <em>oimē</em> (οἴμης) here as ‘starting (from a story-thread)’. (See also PP 63, HC 2§92n.) The paraphrasing here of the song of Demodokos recapitulates the <em>prooimion</em> ‘proemium, prelude’ of the song. [What follows is epitomized from HC 2§§92–93:] In the case of the compound noun <em>prooimion</em> / προοίμιον, conventionally translated as ‘proemium’, the element -<em>oim</em>- / -οιμ- is derived from a root that we find also attested in two simple nouns, <em>oimos</em> / οἶμος and <em>oimē</em> / οἰμή. The Attic by-form of <em>prooimion</em> / προοίμιον, which is <em>phroimion</em> / φροίμιον, elucidates the prehistory of the root: we must reconstruct it not as *<em>oim</em>- but as *<em>hoim</em>-, from *<em>soim</em>-. This reconstruction helps elucidate the surviving contexts of both <em>oimos</em> / οἶμος and <em>oimē</em> / οἰμή, which do not always give a clear picture of the basic meaning of either form. In some contexts, the meaning seems to be ‘song’, as here at O.08.074, while in others it seems to be ‘way, pathway’, as in Hesiod <em>Works and Days</em> 290. With the help of comparative evidence, however, the primary meaning of <em>oimos</em> and <em>oimē</em> can be reconstructed as ‘thread, threading’, and the meanings ‘song’ or ‘way, pathway’ can be explained as secondary: that is, ‘song’ and ‘way, pathway’ are metaphorical generalizations derived from the meaning ‘thread, threading’ (PR 72, 81; also PP 63n20). And it is such a primary meaning ‘thread, threading’ that we find in comparable forms attested in other Indo-European languages: for example, the form *<em>soimos</em> that we reconstruct from Greek <em>oimos</em> is attested as Old Icelandic <em>seimr</em>, meaning ‘thread’ (for this and other examples, see Durante 1976:176). In terms of such a primary meaning, the etymology of the compound noun <em>prooimion</em> ‘proemium’ can be interpreted as a metaphor referring to the ‘initial threading’ of a song. A close semantic parallel to the etymology of Greek <em>prooimion</em> ‘proemium’ as an ‘initial threading’ of a song is the etymology of Latin <em>exordium</em>, which likewise means ‘proemium’ in poetic and rhetorical contexts: the meaning of this noun as well can be traced back to the basic idea of an ‘initial threading’ (PP 63n20). The poetic and rhetorical concepts of both Greek <em>prooimion</em> and Latin <em>exordium</em> in the sense of ‘proemium’ have a common Indo-European ancestry. As I will argue later, not only <em>oimos</em> / <em>oimē</em> / <em>prooimion</em> but also <em>humnos</em>, ordinarily translated as ‘hymn’, are derived from roots that refer to the making of fabric. Moreover, I note that the word <em>oimos</em> is formulaically interchangeable with the word <em>humnos</em> at verse 451 of the <em>Homeric Hymn</em> (4) <em>to Hermes</em>, where we see the attestation of both οἶμος ἀοιδῆς and ὕμνος ἀοιδῆς in the manuscript tradition; at a later point, we will also consider the cognate expression ἀοιδῆς ὕμνον at verse 429 of <em>Odyssey</em> 8. I interpret the combinations of <em>humnos</em> and <em>oimos</em> with <em>aoidē</em> ‘song’ to mean respectively the ‘weaving’ of song and the ‘threading’ of song. Relevant to this interpretation is the context of <em>oimē</em> at verse 74 of <em>Odyssey</em> 8: we see here a metaphorical reference to the initial part of performing a song, that is, to the ‘initial threading’ of a song. To sum up, the meaning of <em>oimos</em> or <em>oimē</em> as ‘song’ results from a metaphorical extension: the idea of <em>making song</em> is being expressed metaphorically through the idea of <em>making fabric</em>. As for contexts where <em>oimos</em> and <em>oimē</em> seem to mean ‘way, pathway’, I argue that such a meaning is likewise a result of metaphorical extension: here the general idea of <em>moving ahead</em> from one point to another is being expressed metaphorically by applying the specific idea of <em>threading one’s way</em> from one point to another (more on this point at HC 2§311, in the excursus there). On points of comparison with the proemium that introduces the <em>History</em> of Herodotus, see PH 221.  </p>