---
author: Olga Levaniouk
shortname: levaniouk
---

@urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:1.223
:citation_urn: urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.1.223.ueTHqtf
:created_at: 2020-03-12T16:45:58.955Z
:updated_at: 2020-03-12T16:45:58.955Z

This is the first occurrence of Penelope's name in the *Odyssey*. Πηνελόπεια is a *nom parlant* and signals Penelope's belonging to a thematically related group of women in myth. The name was perceived as significant in antiquity and a linguistically unobjectionable derivation from the name of a bird, πηνέλοψ, was known to Didymus (as attested by Eustathius' *Commentarii ad Homeri Odysseam* 1.65.36). The etymology of the word πηνέλοψ itself is obscure beyond the second part of the compound, derived from the *h<sub>3</sub>ek<sup>ṷ</sup> root and meaning "looking (like)" (Chantraine 2009, s.v. ὄπωπα, πηνέλοψ). Nevertheless, the relevance of the *penelops* to Penelope can be ascertained. The *penelops* appears to be a bird similar to a halcyon. According to Aristotle *Historia Animalium (*593b23) the *penelops* is a small waterbird and lives at sea. *Penelopes* are mentioned together with halcyons in Aristophanes *Birds* 298 and Ibycus fr. 317a PMG. In the latter fragment, *penelopes* are described as ποικίλαι (2), αἰολόδειροι (2), and possibly also ἁλιπορφυρίδες (3), if Schneidewin's reconstruction is correct (Schneidewin 1833.128-131). *Penelopes* are said to be ποικιλόδειροι and τανυσίπτεροι in Alcaeus 345 L-P.2. Of these epithets the *penelops* shares with the halcyon ποικίλος ‘of varied color’ and τανυσίπτερος ‘long-winged’. If ἁλιπορφυρίδες is correctly restored, then this too allies the *penelops* to the halcyon, which is described by the rare epithet ἁλιπόρφυρος in Alcman 26 PMG.4. The *penelops* in Alcaeus 345 L-P. and the halcyon in Alcman 26 PMG are represented as (respectively) flying over the waves and coming from Okeanos. In poetry and myth, the (female) halcyon characteristically faithful to her mate, laments when the mate is lost, and is tied to the solar symbolism of death and rebirth (e.g. Alcman 26 PMG, Simonides 508 PMG, Aristotle, *Historia Animalium* 8.542b4, Dionysius, *De Avibus* 2.7, Plutarch *On the Intelligence of Animals * 983a). These features are shared by a mythological character whose name derives from the name of the bird, Alkyone, the wife of Keyx (Hesiod, fr. 10a.94-96 M, fr. 10d MW, Ovid, *Metamorphoses* 11.410-748, Ps.-Apollodorus 1.7.4). Alkyone is a woman dominated by faithfulness to her husband, for whom she laments and finally dies when he departs on a long sea voyage and does not return. Just as Penelope's story is morphologically similar to that of Alkyone, so are the two birds that give them their names. Being similar to the halcyon, the *penelops* is a fitting match for Penelope, among whose dominant features are faithfulness to her husband and lament for him while he is absent. An argument has also been made that Penelope takes part in the operation of the overarching solar metaphor in the *Odyssey* (Levaniouk 2011:298-312). The similarities between the two myths parallel those between the two bird-named women and also those between the two birds. The connections appear to be systemic rather than accidental. Penelope and Alkyone have further points of contact with yet another woman with a bird's name, Aedon the nightingale, to whom Penelope compares herself in *Odyssey* 19.518. Penelope and Alkyone are closer to each other than to Aedon, though all three share key features, the most important being their laments. In the same way, *penelops* and halcyon are more similar to each other than to the nightingale, but both have associations with the latter. Both ποικιλόδειρος and αἰολόδειρος (the epithets of the *penelops* in Alcaeus and Ibycus respectively) are epithets of the nightingale (Hesiod *Works and Days* 203; Nonnus *Dionysiaca* 26.211). In Ibycus’ fragment *penelopes* and halcyons are represented as sitting πετάλοισιν ἐπ' ἀκροτάτοις ‘on the topmost leaves’, literally ‘petals’, a *topos* about the nightingale (*Odyssey* xix 520, *Homeric Hymn to Pan* 17-18, *Anthologia Palatina* 12.2.3, 12.136.3). Since the halcyon's voice is described in the same terms as that of the nightingale and since, like the nightingale, the halcyon is imagined as a woman transformed into a bird and forever lamenting, it is likely that the *penelops* too is a bird of lament similar to the nightingale and the halcyon and that, as with the nightingale (Nagy 196:59n.1), the compounds with -δειρος applied to it (ποικιλόδειρος and αἰολόδειρος) signify the quality of its voice rather than the color of its neck. For a fuller discussion of the name's significance see Levaniouk 2011:287-318.\r\n\r\n \r\n\r\nReferences\r\n\r\nChantraine, P. 2009. *Dictionaire etymologique de la langue grecque. Histoire des mots.* Paris.\r\n\r\nLevaniouk, O. 2011. *The Eve of the Festival*. Cambridge, MA.\r\n\r\nNagy, G. 1996. *Poetry as Performance: Homer and beyond.* Cambridge.\r\n\r\nSchneidewin, F. 1833. *Ibyci Rhegini Carminum Reliquiae*, Göttingen.\r\n\r\n \r\n\r\n \r\n\r\n
