+++

tags:
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"
- "a double omen for Odysseus"
- "phēmē ‘something said; something said that means more than what is meant by the one who says it’"
- "kleēdōn ‘prophetic utterance’"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.20.98-20.121.BJw79Qh"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:20.98-20.121"
title: "Odyssey 20.098-121"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>(What follows is epitomized from HR 55–60 = 3§§20–33.) </p><p>[§20.] At O.20.103–104 Odysseus is praying to Zeus for <em>both</em> an omen <em>and</em> a <em>phēmē</em> ‘something said’ as indications telling him that he will indeed prevail over the suitors. Zeus responds by sending <em>both</em> thunder, O.20.103–104, and a <em>phēmē</em>, O.20.105. </p><p>[§21.] The <em>phēmē</em> takes the form of a prayer uttered by an anonymous woman grinding grain with her handmill, O.20.112–119. She is not sure for whom the sign of the god’s thunder is intended, O.20.114 (τεῳ ‘for someone), but she prays to Zeus that he should intend it for her too, O.20.115 (καὶ ἐμοί ‘for me too’) by bringing to fulfillment the <em>epos</em> ‘words’ that she now speaks, O.20.115. The narrative that frames what she says in her prayer likewise refers to the prayer as an <em>epos</em>, adding that this <em>epos</em> is meant to be a <em>sēma</em> ‘sign’ for Odysseus, O.20.111.</p><p>[§22.] What the woman is quoted as saying is poetically represented here as a song, as we can see from the reference to “milling songs” in Plutarch <em>Banquet of the Seven Sages</em> 157 (<em>Carmina Popularia</em> [PMG] no. 869): in this case, it is stated explicitly that a woman is heard singing while grinding grain with her handmill. At O.20.111, the poetic representation of singing here is also indicated by way of the word <em>epos</em>, plural <em>epea</em>, which means not just ‘words’ but also specifically ‘poetic words’ in Homeric diction (see the comments on <em>epea</em> ‘words’ at I.12.387–391 and at I.20.248–250; see also GMP 221).</p><p>[§23.] For some interpreters, an irreversible mistake can be found here in what seems to be a contradiction between the words of the narrative framing the <em>phēmē</em> and the words of the “quoted” <em>phēmē</em> itself. In the words of the <em>phēmē</em> as spoken by the woman, she says that the thundering of Zeus came from the starry sky, O.20.113 (οὐρανοῦ ἀστερόεντος), where no cloud is to be seen, O.20.114 (οὐδέ ποθι νέφος ἐστί ‘and there is not a cloud [<em>nephos</em>] anywhere’). This, then, was the sign that the woman had received: it was a thundering from a clear sky. By contrast, the narrative that frames what she says refers to the thundering of Zeus ‘from ‘radiant Olympus’, O.20.103 (ἀπ᾿ αἰγλήεντος Ὀλύμπου), and the thundering had come ‘from on high, from out of the clouds [<em>nephea</em>]’, O.20.104 (ὑψόθεν ἐκ νεφέων). </p><p>[§24.] Of course, no Homer critic would have any problem if the narrative frame here had been more simple, featuring only one sign—that is, if Odysseus had prayed for only one sign, the thunder of Zeus. The problem seems to arise from the combining of two signs in the narration—the thunder of Zeus and the song of the anonymous woman. It is this combination that has led to what appears to be a contradiction between these two signs. And yet, I propose that the combining of two narrative signs here amounts to an artistic narratological elaboration, which succeeds in producing a special poetic effect by way of juxtaposing the perceptions of the anonymous woman and the perceptions of Odysseus. </p><p>[§25.] For the anonymous woman, only one sign had been needed, the thundering of Zeus, and that is the sign that she had received. For Odysseus, however, the thundering of Zeus was not the complete sign that he had received. It was an incomplete sign. In terms of his own prayer, it had to be completed, complemented, by something that is actually said, which turned out to be the words of the woman. Those words, however, could not become a completed <em>phēmē</em> for Odysseus unless Zeus heeded those words on their own terms, on the woman’s terms. For the woman, the thundering of Zeus came from a clear sky. For Odysseus, the same thundering had come from a clouded sky, and the message of Zeus became clear only after the woman received her own message from a clear sky. The wording of the woman, an incipient <em>epos</em> that was as yet unclear for her, became a finished <em>epos</em> that was indeed clear for Odysseus, just as the thundering of Zeus shifted perceptually from a clouded to a clear sky. For Odysseus, the clarification and hence the fulfillment of the <em>epos</em> of the woman makes this <em>epos</em> into a genuine prophetic utterance: the <em>phēmē</em> ‘thing said’ as it is called at O.20.100 and at O.20.105 turns out to be a <em>kleēdōn</em> ‘prophetic utterance’, as it is finally called at O.20.120. The woman’s words have now become fulfilled as a speech-act. Her speech—or song—has now become an act of special prophecy, of cledonomancy. At the moment of fulfillment, Odysseus rejoices at both omens: (1) the prophetic utterance, <em>kleēdōn</em>, and (2) the thundering of Zeus. Here is the wording: ‘he rejoiced at the <em>kleēdōn</em> | and at the thundering of Zeus’, O.20.120–121 (χαῖρεν δὲ κλεηδόνι ... | Ζηνός τε βροντῇ).</p><p>[§26.] The prophecy, of course, starts with Zeus, whose thundering is in itself the primal act that leads to the cledonomancy. Zeus himself is ultimately prophetic in his manifestations of weather, and his meaning can be ambivalently bright or dark, clear or cloudy, positive or negative. The Indo-European form *<em>di̯eu</em>-, which becomes Greek <em>Zeus</em> (Ζεύς), means basically ‘sky’, thus conveying a cledonomantic ambivalence: it portends either clear or clouded weather. Despite this ambivalence of clear or clouded, positive or negative, in the meaning ‘sky’, the Indo-European noun *<em>di̯eu</em>- stems from the verb *<em>diu̯</em>-, which has only the positive meaning ‘be bright / clear’, not the negative ‘be dark / cloudy’. The darkness and the clouds show the other side of Zeus.</p><p>[§27.] There is a similar cledonomantic ambivalence in the meaning of the Indo-European form *<em>nebhos</em>, which becomes Greek <em>nephos</em> (νέφος) ‘cloud’: it means basically ‘cloud’ in ambivalently good or bad weather. This ambivalence explains the fact that in some Indo-European languages the derivative of *<em>nebhos</em> means primarily ‘sky’, by way of metonymy. Such is the case with Russian <em>nebo</em> ‘sky’. Thus in Russian idiom, <em>na nebe ni oblaka</em> means ‘there’s not a cloud [<em>oblako</em>] in the sky [<em>nebo</em>]’. From the standpoint of Indo-European linguistics, we see here a new word for ‘cloud’, <em>oblako</em>, while the old word for ‘cloud’ has become, metonymically, the new word for ‘sky’. This new word can even stand for a cloudless sky, as in the idiom we have just seen: <em>na nebe ni oblaka</em> means ‘there’s not a cloud [<em>oblako</em>] in the sky [<em>nebo</em>]’. </p><p>[§28.] Such a metonymic sense of Indo-European *<em>nebhos</em> as ‘sky’ is visible also in some Homeric usages of the noun <em>nephos</em> / <em>nephea</em> ‘cloud’ / ‘clouds’, which is potentially ambivalent in its own right concerning questions of good or bad weather. When Zeus thunders ‘from on high, from out of the clouds [<em>nephea</em>]’ at O.20.105 (ὑψόθεν ἐκ νεφέων), he is thundering from the sky, through the metonymy of the clouds. In this case, the ambivalence of clouds or sky is canceled only by the explicit statement, in the words of the singing woman at 20.114, that there is no <em>nephos</em> ‘cloud’ in the sky. In all other Homeric attestations, the potential metonymic sense of <em>nephos</em> / <em>nephea</em> as ‘sky’ can remain in force. A particularly striking example of this metonymic sense of ‘sky’ is evident at I.13.523–524, where Zeus is pictured as sitting in grand isolation on the summit of Olympus, under a shining canopy of ‘golden <em>nephea</em>’ (ἀλλ᾿ ὁ γὰρ ἄκρῳ Ὀλύμπῳ ὑπὸ χρυσέοισι νέφεσσιν | ἦστο). At that moment in the narrative, the god is described as ‘wrapped up’ in his own thoughts, which are conventionally called the Will of Zeus, I.13.524 (Διὸς βουλῇσιν ἐελμένος). The scholia V for O.20.104 actually cite this Iliadic passage, explaining the usage of <em>nephea</em> at O.20.104 in terms of metonymy. A similar explanation is offered in Scholia BQ: that the word <em>nephea</em> at O.20.102 is to be understood as referring to a realm where clouds can be expected to happen.</p><p>[§29.] I propose that the theme of the Will of Zeus, as a conventional plot device of Homeric narrative, is essential for understanding the double omen of Zeus’ thunder and the woman’s song in the <em>Odyssey</em>. I propose, further, that the weather in this passage of the <em>Odyssey</em> depends on the Will of Zeus, and that the sudden shift from a cloudy to a clear sky is a choice in Homeric narratology, not a mistake in Homeric meteorology.</p><p>[§30.] Moreover, the sudden shift from cloudy to clear skies can happen only after the narrative makes it clear that there is not a cloud in the sky. Before that clarification, it was left unclear whether or not the sky was cloudy. If the thundering of Zeus comes out of a clear blue sky, it is a bigger omen than if it comes out of a cloudy sky. If Odysseus had prayed for just one omen, not two, it would not be clear whether the thundering of Zeus had happened in cloudy or in clear weather. Since he prayed for two omens, however, and since the second omen was granted, now everything is clear, and the prophecy is augmented.</p><p>[§31.] The shift from a clouded sky to a clear one depends on the clarification of the Will of Zeus in the course of the narrative. Further, the <em>sēma</em> ‘sign’ meant by Zeus for Odysseus at O.20.111 depends implicitly on the faculty for both encoding and decoding it, and that faculty is conventionally expressed by the noun <em>nóos</em> ‘mind’ and the verb <em>noeîn</em> ‘take note (of), notice’ (see the anchor comment at I.05.669). The <em>nóos</em> or ‘intentionality’ of Zeus is key to understanding the plot-constructions of Homeric narrative. In the <em>Iliad</em>, for example, when Zeus expresses his Will by nodding his head, I.01.524–527, Hērā reacts by chiding him for not telling what it is that he really intends—literally, for not making an <em>epos</em> out of what he ‘has in his <em>nóos</em>’, as expressed by the verb <em>noeîn</em> at I.01.543. Zeus replies that the <em>mūthos</em> ‘wording’ that he ‘has in his <em>nóos</em>’ as expressed again by <em>noeîn</em> at I.01.549, is for him alone to know. And yet, the Homeric audience may already know, since the <em>Iliad</em> declares programmatically that its plot <em>is</em> the Will of Zeus, I.01.005. See the comment at that line (see also GMP 222).</p><p>[§32.] To sum up, I repeat my earlier formulation: when Zeus thunders ‘from on high, from out of the clouds [<em>nephea</em>]’ at O.20.105 (ὑψόθεν ἐκ νεφέων), he is essentially thundering from the sky, through the metonymy of the clouds. This poetic description in the framing narrative does not contradict, per se, the later perception of a clear sky within the framed speech, O.20.114: ‘and there is not a cloud [<em>nephos</em>] anywhere’ (οὐδέ ποθι νέφος ἐστί). But that later perception does indeed clarify the earlier narrative perception of a sky that <em>may</em> be clouded over. Now the sky is clear, as the cledonomantic words have finally been clarified.</p><p>[§33.] The time has come to rethink the passage I have analyzed here in terms of oral poetics, not just poetics per se. I hold that the complexities of this passage reflect the accretions of a highly sophisticated oral poetic tradition that kept on continually recombining its older and its newer elements in the productive phases of its evolution. These older and newer elements may at times seem to contradict each other if we stop and view each of them as individual parts, but I suggest that such contradictions were transcended by the actual re-combinations of these parts into the totality of an ongoing system that we know as Homeric poetry. In order to account for such an ongoing system, I developed my evolutionary model for the making of Homeric poetry. For more on such a model, see the comment at I.12.335–336 and at I.13.066; also the Excursus on O.13.158.   </p>