+++

tags:
- "daughters of Pandareos"
- "thuellai &#39;gusts of wind&#39;"
- "harpuiai ‘rapacious gusts of wind, Harpies’"
- "abduction by gusts of wind"
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"
- "Aphrodite"
- "Hērā"
- "Artemis"
- "Athena"
- "Erīnues ‘Furies’"
- "ring composition"
- "Ōkeanos"
- "death wish of Penelope"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.20.61-20.80.eSi7LNG"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:20.61-20.80"
title: "Odyssey 20.061-080"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>In a despondent mood, unable to fall asleep, Penelope prays to the goddess Artemis, wishing for a death that should happen <em>ēdē</em> ‘already now’, O.20.061 (ἤδη), that is, <em>autika</em> <em>nūn</em> ‘right this instant’, O.20.063 (αὐτίκα νῦν). Such a death, if it is to happen ‘right this instant’, would come from arrows shot by Artemis, O.20.061–063. And such an instantaneous death would thus happen before Penelope were to be forced into marrying one of the suitors. Alternatively, however, the death that she wishes for could happen at a later point, as indicated by way of the expression <em>ē</em> <em>epeita</em> ‘or later’, O.20.063 (ἢ ἔπειτα). In the case of such a postponed death, the sequence of events would have already reached a moment where a forced marriage has already been arranged for an unwilling Penelope—and where the wedding is already about to take place. Penelope’s alternative wish to die at such a later moment, right before an actual wedding, pictures the same kind of death that had been experienced once upon a time by the daughters of Pandareos, whose story will now be retold, starting at O.20.066. The retelling of this story from a distant past will be worded by Penelope herself, who will now make a comparison between what had happened to the daughters of Pandareos and what she imagines will eventually happen in her own story if she is forced to marry one of the suitors. Here is the wording that introduces the comparison between the dreaded future of Penelope and the dreaded past of the daughters of Pandareos. A moment in that past time is described most ominously here: ‘just as when gusts of wind [<em>thúellai</em>] took away [<em>an-heleîn</em>] the daughters of Pandareos’, O.20.066 (ὡς δ&#x27; ὅτε Πανδαρέου κούρας ἀνέλοντο θύελλαι). So, just as the daughters of Pandareos had been taken away by gusts of wind right before their wedding, so also Penelope, in her prayer, wishes for a comparable death if she cannot die right away. Here is how she says it: ‘or later [<em>ē epeita</em>] may a gust of wind [<em>thúella</em>], snatch me away [<em>an-harpáxāsa</em>]...’, O.20.063 (ἢ ἔπειτά μ’ ἀναρπάξασα θύελλα), ‘... and drop me into the forward-flowing streams of the Ōkeanos’, O.20.063–065 (ἐν προχοῇς βάλοι ... Ὠκεανοῖο). This world-encircling river Ōkeanos, as we have already seen in other Homeric contexts, separates the living from the dead. See especially the comment at O.10.508–512: <em>to cross the streams of the Ōkeanos is to cross into Hādēs</em>. So, if Penelope cannot be granted her first wish, which is, to die right now, shot to death by the arrows of Artemis, then the wording of her prayer allows her to ask for her alternative second wish, which is, to experience death before any wedding is arranged against her will. But how does such a wedding, dreaded by Penelope, compare with the wedding that had been arranged for the daughters of Pandareos? At O.20.073–076, we see that the divinity who was arranging for these girls to get married was Aphrodite, seemingly acting as a sole agent. Earlier, at O.20.067–069, we see that Aphrodite had saved the girls from dying after their parents had been destroyed by the gods: it seems that the orphan girls were still infants, and Aphrodite raised them on a diet of cheese, honey, and wine, O.20.068–069. As the little orphans, saved by Aphrodite, were growing up, other female deities took part in raising them: (1) Hērā gave them beauty and intelligence, O.20.070–071, (2) Artemis gave them just the right dimensions to grow into, O.20.71, and (3) Athena gave them skills, O.20.072—which surely included expertise in weaving. But then, at a point where the girls are already so perfectly ready for marriage—a marriage that Aphrodite had personally arranged for them—they are snatched away by violent gusts of wind, O.20.077, which deliver them to <em>Erīnues</em> ‘Furies’ whom they are now destined to serve as attendants, O.20.078. And the removal of the girls from the visible world is described here in wording that is more violent than the wording that had previously described the death wished by Penelope for herself. Penelope’s wording had referred to a <em>thúella</em> ‘gust of wind’ that would snatch her away from the visible world, O.20.063, and carry her off to the Ōkeanos, where she would cross into the realm of Hādēs. But now, at O.20.077, the gusts of winds that snatch away the daughters of Pandareos are <em>hárpuiai</em>, and the violence of these gusts of wind is evident in the English word that is used to translate the personifications of these ‘rapacious gusts of wind’. These personified gusts of wind are the <em>Harpies</em>. And the death of these unfortunate girls who were seized by the Harpies is then followed by a horrific afterlife, imagined as an eternity of servitude to <em>Erīnues</em> ‘Furies’, O.20.078. How, then, to account for the dreaded fate of the daughters of Pandareos? Something went very wrong here. Although the Homeric narrative gives no details about the identity of the bridegrooms intended for these would-be brides, I suspect that there was something wrong with them in particular—and that the sole agency of Aphrodite in arranging for the would-be wedding, seemingly to the exclusion of Hērā, Artemis, and Athena, signals what might have gone wrong for the daughters of Pandareos. Whatever it was that did go wrong for these doomed girls, Penelope says that the infernal fate that awaited them is for her still preferable to the dreaded prospect of her getting married off to any of the suitors. Before I can bring this analysis to a close, I must return here to the wording <em>ē epeita</em> at O.20.063, which I have translated simply as ‘or later’. <em>The function of this wording can easily be misunderstood if we lose track of the ring composition that is activated at this point</em>. Penelope wishes for an immediate death caused by the shafts of Artemis, O.20.061–063, or a delayed death caused by the abducting winds, O.20.63–65. At O.20.066, the story about the abduction of the daughters of Pandareos is introduced as a precedent. The story is further developed at O.20.067–076, climaxed at O.20.077, where we see a recap of O.22.066. Then the line at O.20.079 recaps Penelope&#x27;s wish for a delayed death, and, to close out the ring composition, the line at O.22.080 recaps her original wish for an immediate death. So, the force of <em>ē epeita</em> ‘or later&#x27; in expressing a delayed death at O.20.063 is that the winds would snatch Penelope away at a later point in the presumed narrative, <em>right before her marriage to one of the suitors</em>, just as the Harpies abducted the daughters of Pandareos <em>right before the arranged marriage of these doomed girls</em>, O.20.073–074. My interpretation of <em>ē epeita</em> &#x27;or later&#x27; here at O.20.063 helps explain the connotations of the epithet <em>metakhróniai</em> &#x27;delayed&#x27; as applied to the <em>Hárpuiai</em> ‘Harpies’ at Hesiod <em>Theogony</em> 269. </p>