+++

tags:
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Iliad"
- "counter-speech of Aeneas to Achilles"
- "epea ‘words; words of poetry’"
- "neikos ‘quarrel’"
- "neikeîn ‘quarrel with’"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Iliad.20.200-20.258.2euwCxB"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:20.200-20.258"
title: "Iliad 20.200–258"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>In this speech, Aeneas speaks to Achilles from the standpoint of an epic tradition that glorifies primarily Aeneas, not Achilles. At I.20.200, Aeneas uses the word <em>epea</em> ‘words’ in referring negatively to the earlier speech of Achilles, I.20.178–198, where Achilles had spoken from the standpoint of an epic tradition that glorified primarily Achilles. This word <em>epea</em>—pronounced as <em>epē</em> in prose—normally means simply ‘words’ when it is used inside of epic diction, but it can also mean ‘words of poetry’ when it is used outside of such diction in contexts referring to poetry, especially to epic poetry. In prose, this kind of usage leads to the explicit meaning of <em>epē</em> as ‘epic poetry’. And, exceptionally, such a meaning of <em>epē</em> can even occur within the diction of epic poetry itself. That is what seems to be happening in the context of I.20.200, where <em>epea</em> refers to the words of Achilles as if they were the ‘poetic words’ of epic—that is, as if these words were the equivalent of epic itself. Do not try to intimidate me, Aeneas says to Achilles at I.20.200–201, by telling <em>epea</em> ‘words’ about past epic events like our mutual encounter in the highlands of Mount Ida and beyond. Yes, some epics will glorify you, but there are other epics that will glorify me instead. See further in the comment below on I.20.248–250. By implication, Aeneas is saying here that he has access to a different though related version of epic events, and that such a version will glorify him at the expense of Achilles. In fact, the entire speech of Aeneas at I.20.200–258 is a glorification of this hero by way of an epic tradition that is different from though related to the tradition that glorifies Achilles. This different tradition, as Aeneas goes on to demonstrate, glorifies primarily Aeneas himself. Meanwhile, the poetic implications of the word <em>epea</em> as ‘epic’ now become more explicit at I.20.203–205. Aeneas says here that he and Achilles know stories about each other not because they have been eyewitnesses to these stories, I.20.205, but because they both have heard, as other listeners have also heard, the <em>epea</em> that are the stories, and these <em>epea</em> are <em>pro-kluta</em> ‘glorious’, I.20.204. In this context, then, the word <em>epea</em> comes close to meaning ‘epics’, since the idea of <em>pro-kluta</em> as poetically ‘glorious’ is linked with the etymology of this adjective as ‘prominently heard’, just as the idea of <em>kleos</em> as a poetic kind of ‘glory’ is linked with the etymology of this noun as ‘the thing that is heard’. See the comment on I.02.484–487. Also relevant to the sense of <em>epea</em> as ‘words of poetry’ is the mutual negativity of the rivalry that is ongoing here between the two different epic traditions about Aeneas and Achilles. For example, there is an insulting reference that Aeneas makes at I.20.211 to the <em>epea</em> as recounted by Achilles about Aeneas. Those <em>epea</em> or ‘words of poetry’, as a veritable ‘epic’ told by Achilles, were certainly negative about Aeneas, just as Aeneas is now speaking negatively about Achilles and about that hero’s role in those same <em>epea</em>. Such mutual negativity is expressed by way of using words of blame poetry as contained within the epic, even though epic sees itself as a form of poetry that engages primarily in words of praise. The negativity of blame poetry is actually signaled in the words of Aeneas at I.20.251, who uses the noun <em>neikea</em>, plural of <em>neikos</em> ‘quarrel’, in referring to the mutual negativity that the two heroes express in their speeches to and about each other. See further in the comment on I.20.244–256.  </p>