+++

tags:
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.13.158.D6cm2J5"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:13.158"
title: "Excursus on Odyssey 13.158"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>(Epitomized from Nagy 2001:84–91, where bibliography is provided about the various different views concerning this verse.)</p><p>According to the version of O.13.158 that survives only by way of Aristophanes, the future of the Phaeacians is not at all closed off. It remains open-ended, extending into the “present” when the epic is being narrated. The threatening mountain will not block the harbor of the Phaeacians from the outside world —if we read <em>mēde</em> ‘but not…’ instead of <em>mega de</em> ‘and a huge…’ at O.13.158.</p><p>Two questions immediately come to mind. First, how could this different version fit the overall narrative of the Homeric <em>Odyssey</em>? Second, is the textual basis of this version “legitimate”? </p><p>I already addressed the first question in the comments above, taking a close look at the logic of the narrative after O.13.158. Here I turn to the second question about O.13.158: is the textual basis of the different version featuring <em>mēde</em> ‘but not…’ really “legitimate”? We can now add a related question: if it is legitimate, then does that delegitimize the version featuring <em>mega de</em> ‘and a huge…’?</p><p>Whether we need to choose one or the other variant depends on the way we look at Homeric poetry. If this poetry is merely a static text, then we are indeed forced to make a choice. If, however, we view Homeric poetry as a living system—an oral tradition that evolves ultimately into the textual tradition inherited by the Alexandrian editors—then we do not have to choose whenever we see a variation. Rather, as I will now go on to argue, the choices were already being made by Homeric poetry itself, which could opt for different variants in different phases of its own evolution. </p><p>My reasoning here derives from an overall “evolutionary model” that I have worked out as a general way of accounting for the making of Homeric poetry (PasP 109–114 and HQ 29–112). In terms of this model, as I now plan to argue, the living and evolving oral tradition of Homeric poetry itself allowed for a choice either to seal off its own past from the present time of narration or to reach into this present time and thereby make its presence fully manifest.</p><p>According to the narrative option linked with the first of our two variants from O.13.158, <em>mega de</em> ‘and a huge…’, the outlook is hopeless for the Phaeacians, since Poseidon&#x27;s plan to seal off the city of the Phaeacians has been restated by Zeus and is therefore tantamount to the Will of Zeus, which the Homeric tradition conventionally equates with the way things ultimately turn out in epic narrative, as at I.01.005. At the beginning of the <em>Odyssey</em>, however, Zeus himself undercuts the equation of epic plot with the Will of Zeus, O.01.032–034. That is, there are differences in shades of meaning between the Iliadic and the Odyssean perspectives on the Will of Zeus as the plot of epic (PH 241–242). </p><p>According to the narrative option linked with the second variant <em>mēde</em> ‘but not…’, the outlook is still hopeful. After all, at an earlier point in the narrative, O.13.144–145, we can see a way out when Zeus tells Poseidon to exact any punishment he pleases ‘if any human dishonors you not at all’ (ἀνδρῶν δ᾿ εἴ περ τίς σε . . . | οὔ τι τίει), O.13.143–144. The context is this: Poseidon has been angrily questioning Zeus, calling on him to explain the Will of Zeus (Διὸς δ᾿ ἐξείρετο βουλήν), O.13.127. That is, Poseidon calls on Zeus to explain the overall plot of the narrative—now that the Phaeacians have conveyed Odysseus back home to Ithaca. How can I be honored among the gods, Poseidon plaintively asks Zeus, ‘when the Phaeacians do not honor me at all?’ (ὅτε με βροτοὶ οὔ τι τίουσι | Φαίηκες), O.13.129–130. But then, as we have already seen in the comments, the story goes on to say that the Phaeacians will indeed initiate a remedy after the first disaster by proceeding to honor Poseidon with sacrifice in order to avert the second disaster, which is, the envelopment of their harbor by a huge mountain. </p><p>The narrative option that I link with the variant <em>mēde</em> ‘but not…’, according to which the Phaeacians are to be spared the second disaster of an all-enveloping mountain, depends on whether this variant as adduced by Aristophanes of Byzantium in place of <em>mega de</em> ‘and a huge…’ at O.13.158 is a genuine <em>formulaic</em> variant or only a <em>textual</em> variant. If it is the latter, then <em>mēde</em> ‘but not…’ may be just an editorial conjecture. That possibility would severely reduce the chances for arguing that <em>mēde</em> ‘but not…’ is a genuine alternative to <em>mega de</em> ‘and a huge…’. In what follows, however, I will argue against that possibility on several levels.</p><p>From an analysis of the formulaic system in which <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; is embedded, this form can be justified as a functioning element in that system, just as the form <em>mega de</em> &#x27;and a huge...&#x27; is a functioning element: in other words, <em>mēde</em> and <em>mega de</em> can be considered compositional alternatives in the formulaic system of Homeric diction.</p><p>As Leonard Muellner points out in a message written 1998.03.10 to me and to Chad E. Turner, <em>mega de</em> ‘and a huge…’ at O.13.177 is syntactically and formulaically parallel to <em>mēde</em> ‘but not’ at O.13.183. In a message written 1998.02.03, Turner had pointed out to me that the metrical placement of <em>mēde</em> ‘but not…’  at O.13.198 is singular (although there are cases where this word straddles the last syllable of a spondee and the first syllable of a dactyl in the third and fourth feet, he finds no other cases in the second and third feet). But the formulaic system is capable of generating rare forms and combinations. For a striking example, we may compare the unique attestation of <em>mēden</em> at I.18. 500: here is a word that is found this one and only time in the <em>Iliad</em> and the <em>Odyssey</em> put together, and yet it can be shown to be <em>formulaic</em>. See Muellner 1976:101–102, 106.</p><p>Moreover, there is immediate contextual as well as formulaic evidence to support the argument that <em>mēde</em> ‘but not…’ is a functioning compositional variant in the formulaic system. Let us consider the wording of Zeus in his answer to Poseidon&#x27;s angry questioning at O.13.145:</p><p>|145 ἔρξον ὅπως ἐθέλεις καί τοι φίλον ἔπλετο θυμῷ</p><p>|145 Do as you wish and as was pleasing to your heart.</p><p>This open-ended wording of Zeus matches formulaically the wording of Alkinoos, when he had originally “quoted” the prophecy of his father, O.08.570–571:</p><p>|570 ὣς ἀγόρευ᾿ ὁ γέρων. τὰ δέ κεν θεὸς ἢ τελέσειεν, |571 ἤ κ᾿ ἀτέλεστ᾿ εἴη, ὥς οἱ φίλον ἔπλετο θυμῷ</p><p>|570 That is what the old man said. And the god [Poseidon] could either bring these things to fulfillment |571 or they could be left unfulfilled, however it was pleasing to his heart.</p><p>The formulation of Zeus, then, in leaving it still undecided whether or not the Phaeacians are to be ‘enveloped’, can be used as evidence to argue that <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; is indeed a genuine compositional alternative to <em>mega de </em>&#x27;and a huge...&#x27;.</p><p>As for the possibility that <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; is an emendation based on an editorial conjecture, my own cumulative work on Homeric variants as adduced by the three great Alexandrian editors of Homer (Zenodotus, Aristophanes, and Aristarchus) leaves me skeptical, since I find that these editors normally do not make emendations without manuscript evidence (PasP 107–152). </p><p>In making the specific argument that both variants <em>mega de</em> &#x27;and a huge...&#x27; and <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; are genuine compositional alternatives, I return to my general argument that Homeric poetry is not a static text but a slowly evolving system. In terms of this general argument, the variant mega de produces a narrative closure for the Phaeacians: their fate is sealed. The variant <em>mēde</em>, however, produces an outcome that is open-ended.</p><p>These two variants, I contend, reflect different phases in the evolution of Homeric poetry. Let us begin with the variant <em>mega de </em>&#x27;and a huge...&#x27;, the context of which can be linked with a relatively more Panhellenic phase of epic. (On the relativity of Panhellenism—despite the absolutist implications of the term—as a cultural impulse, see <em>PH</em> p. 53.) I have defined this phase elsewhere as one that “concentrates on traditions that tend to be common to most locales and peculiar to none” (PH 54). The Panhellenic phases of epic make contact with the “present” time of narration by shading over any “local color” that might distract from the widest possible range of ways to visualize this “present” (PH 53). A Panhellenic version, then, will tend to universalize the concerns of the present.</p><p>But there are also other, less Panhellenic, ways for epic to make contact with the “present” time in which narration happens: the “local color” can be highlighted, though only at the cost of narrowing the range of ways to visualize this “present.” The context of the variant <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; can be linked with such a relatively less Panhellenic phase of epic. This variant makes contact with the epic “present” in a less universalized and more localized way. One focus of localization is historical Corcyra, modern-day Corfù. </p><p>The fact is, the Corcyraeans of the Classical period claimed to be residents of the land of the Phaeacians, as we know from a remark of Thucydides (1.25.4); from another remark of his, we know also that they worshipped King Alkinoos as their local cult hero (3.70.4). </p><p>In O.13.155–158, we hear how the Phaeacians will one day look out at their harbor and see their returning ship suddenly turn into a rock, and we hear also how that fabulous petrified ship will continue to be a most wondrous sight for future generations of humanity to see and to keep on seeing for all time to come. There are references to this “real-life” rock in Pliny (<em>Natural History</em>) 4.53 and Eustathius (Commentary on <em>Odyssey</em> vol. II p. 44 line 27), and to this day the “petrified ship” remains a most celebrated tourist attraction for visitors to Corfù. But the essential point is, the reference to this rock is already there in the <em>Odyssey</em>—that is, in a version of the <em>Odyssey</em> that says <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; instead of <em>mega de</em> &#x27;and a huge...&#x27; at O.13.158.</p><p>The identity of the Corcyraeans as descendants of the Phaeacians depends on the Will of Zeus as he formulates it at O.13.155–158, and it depends especially on the variant <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; of O.13.158, which yields an open-ended narrative that reaches directly into the “present” of the Classical period and beyond. </p><p>As a political and cultural fact of life, the self-identification of the Corcyraeans with the Phaeacians has been dated as far back as the eighth century BCE, when the island was settled by colonists from Eretria and, soon thereafter, from Corinth (Plutarch <em>Greek Questions</em> 293a; further sources analyzed in Frame 257n158). The variant represented by <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; at O.13.158 may be just as early, and in fact it may be the vehicle for expressing just such a political and cultural fact of life. This is not to say that the other variant represented by <em>mega de</em> &#x27;and a huge...&#x27; at O.13.158 may not be just as early. It is only to say that both variants were still available to the Homeric tradition of epic as it evolved during the pre-Classical period. In such an early period, the affirming—or the denying—of a claim of descent from the Phaeacians was essential not just poetically but also politically and culturally. It really mattered then, and it continued to matter well into the Classical period of the fifth century and beyond, as we have seen from the remark of Thucydides (1.25.4, 3.70.4) about the Corcyraeans’ claim that they inhabited the land of the Phaeacians, whose king, Alkinoos, they worshipped as their local hero. </p><p>In the Hellenistic period of the Alexandrian editors of Homer, by contrast, the question of choosing <em>mega de</em> &#x27;and a huge...&#x27; or <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; would have mattered purely from a poetical rather than a political or cultural point of view. The Corcyraeans’ claims to the land of the Phaeacians would not be a major concern any more, at least not politically. But it would still really matter in another way: was the petrified ship of the Phaeacians a figment of the poetic imagination, walled off in the epic past, or is it the same thing as the real-life rock at the entrance to the harbor of Corcyra, accessible to all humanity in the contemporary Hellenic world? The disagreement between Aristarchus and Aristophanes over the choice of <em>mega de</em> &#x27;and a huge...&#x27; or <em>mēde</em> &#x27;but not...&#x27; respectively must have centered on such questions. One way, we see a beautiful snapshot from the enchanted imaginary world of the epic past. The other way, we see a comparably beautiful vista in the enchanting touristic world of the non-epic present, still anchored in the permanence of the epic past. Either way, petrified ship or scenic rock, what we see is a beloved cultural landmark of Hellenism.</p><p>All this is not to say that we must ultimately choose between these two versions of seeing things Homeric. It is only to say that both variants were still available to the Homeric tradition of epic as it evolved into the Classical period and beyond. And it is to ponder the power of epic either to close down or to open up its pathways to the present. The fate of the Phaeacians in conveying the heroic past to the present depends on that power of Homeric dimensions. </p>