+++

tags:
- "Iliad 10 and the Poetics of Ambush"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Iliad.10.243.Wyk7Sqf"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:10.243"
title: "Iliad 10.243"

authors:
- email: "cldue@central.uh.edu"
  name: "Casey Dué Hackney"
  username: "cldue"
- email: "mebbott@holycross.edu"
  name: "Mary Ebbott"
  username: "mebbott"
+++

<p>ἂν ἔπειτ᾽ Ὀδυσῆος ἐγὼ θείοιο λαθοίμην</p><p>Diomedes chooses Odysseus to go with him on the expedition, and that choice is marked in the formulaic language by a shift to the dual from 10.254 onwards, where the two heroes are understood to be a closely linked pair. (See also above on the dual Αἴαντε at 10.53 and 10.228.) The ensuing events of this book have long troubled scholars, who find the actions of Odysseus and Diomedes during this night raid to be un-Homeric and even un-heroic. (See “The Poetics of Ambush.”) But if we look at the Greek epic tradition as a whole, taking into account what we know of the now lost poems of the Epic Cycle, we find that Diomedes and Odysseus traditionally excel at the kind of ambush warfare depicted in <em>Iliad</em> 10. Diomedes is a stellar fighter in the <em>polemos</em>, but he is equally good at the <em>lokhos</em>. The sack of Troy is the ultimate night ambush, and both Odysseus and Diomedes are involved in several nighttime escapades leading up to and during its fall, including the following.</p><p>In testimonium 34 [Bernabé] of the <em>Cypria</em>, a lesser-known version of Polyxena’s story has her being wounded by Odysseus and Diomedes during the sack.</p><p>ὑπὸ Νεοπτολέμου φασὶν αὐτὴν (sc<em>.</em> Πολυξένην) σφαγιασθῆναι Εὐριπίδης καὶ Ἴβυκος. ὁ δὲ τὰ Κυπριακὰ ποιήσας φησίν ὑπὸ Ὀδυσσέως καὶ Διομήδους ἐν τῆι τῆς πόλεως ἁλώσει τραυματισθεῖσαν ἀπολέσθαι.</p><p>Scholia to Euripides, <em>Hecuba</em> 41</p><p>Euripides and Ibycus say that Polyxena’s throat was cut by Neoptolemos. But the composer of the <em>Cypria</em> says that she died after being wounded by Odysseus and Diomedes in the capture of the city.</p><p>In the <em>Little Iliad</em>, Odysseus seems to have been connected to the ambush and capture of Helenos, the prophetic son of Priam, and it is Diomedes, according to Proklos, who brings back Philoktetes from Lemnos. (Cf. Sophocles’ <em>Philoktetes</em>, where Odysseus is the one who goes to get him.) Philoktetes’ presence is required, according to Helenos, for the successful capture of Troy:</p><p>μετὰ ταῦτα Ὀδυσσεὺς λοχήσας Ἕλενον λαμβάνει, καὶ χρήσαντος περὶ τῆς ἁλώσεως τούτου Διομήδης ἐκ Λήμνου Φιλοκτήτην ἀνάγει.</p><p><em>Little Iliad</em>, from the summary of Proklos</p><p>After this Odysseus captures Helenos in an ambush, and as a result of Helenos’ prophecy about the city’s conquest Diomedes brings Philoktetes back from Lemnos.</p><p>Also narrated in the <em>Little Iliad</em>, according to Proklos, was the theft of the Palladion, which survives in several variant versions in which Diomedes or Odysseus or both try to get sole possession of it, betraying the other. The Palladion is yet another item that had been foretold to be required for the successful capture of Troy. In these ambush style episodes we find Odysseus and Diomedes frequently working as a team, though sometimes they split up the work or act on their own. As the episode with the Palladion suggests, the advantages of working as a team do not cancel out the desire on the part of each hero to obtain great glory for himself.</p><p>Still another attested collaborative ambush by Odysseus and Diomedes is the killing of Palamedes. In <em>Cypria</em> testimonium 30 [Bernabé], Diomedes and Odysseus drown Palamedes, ambushing him while he is fishing:</p><p>Παλαμήδην δὲ ἀποπνιγῆναι προελθόντα ἐπὶ ἰχθύων θήραν, Διομήδην δὲ τὸν ἀποκτείναντα εἶναι καὶ Ὀδυσσέα ἐπιλεξάμενος ἐν ἔπεσιν οἶδα τοῖς Κυπρίοις.</p><p>Pausanias 10.31.2</p><p>Palamedes was drowned when he went out to catch fish. Diomedes was the killer and also Odysseus, as I know from reading it in the epic poem the <em>Cypria</em>.</p><p>In all of these episodes Diomedes is linked, as in the Doloneia, with Odysseus. Indeed, Odysseus has long been understood to be the hero of <em>mētis</em>. (See on 10.137 and 10.148 above.) But it should not be forgotten that, like Diomedes, Odysseus has his fair share of traditional fighting. The <em>Odyssey</em> ends with Odysseus about to engage the families of the suitors in battle, and with Laertes rejoicing that he will have a contest for <em>aretē</em> with his son and grandson (<em>Odyssey</em> 24.515). When Demodokos sings about the fall of Troy in <em>Odyssey</em> 8, Odysseus is the hero raging “like Ares” through the streets of Troy (<em>Odyssey</em> 8.515). In <em>Iliad</em> 11.310–319, Odysseus and Diomedes together stave off a rout of the Greek forces before both are wounded. Recent scholarship has focused on the oppositions set up between <em>mētis</em> and <em>biē</em> in Homeric poetry (see e.g. Nagy 1979:45–48), but as Donna Wilson (2005) has recently pointed out, the two concepts are also complementary in many respects.  </p>