+++

tags:
- "Iliad 10 and the Poetics of Ambush"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Iliad.10.212-10.213.LPPJqJu"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:10.212-10.213"
title: "Iliad 10.212-213"

authors:
- email: "mebbott@holycross.edu"
  name: "Mary Ebbott"
  username: "mebbott"
- email: "cldue@central.uh.edu"
  name: "Casey Dué Hackney"
  username: "cldue"
+++

<p>κλέος ‘glory in song’ and δόσις ‘gift’ are not incompatible rewards in Homeric epic. Throughout the <em>Iliad</em> material prizes are a physical manifestation of a warrior’s place in the song tradition and are a major sources of contention among heroes. In <em>Iliad</em> 1, when Agamemnon threatens to take Achilles’ prize (γέρας), the woman Briseis, Achilles says that he does not intend to continue fighting ἄτιμος (‘without honor’, <em>Iliad</em> 1.171). As Casey Dué has noted, the dispute over prize women in <em>Iliad</em> 1 is actually about τιμή (<em>Iliad</em> 1.161, 1.174, 1.412, 1.503–510). This word is generally translated as ‘honor’, but it conveys specifically the honor heroes receive after death in cult and song as immortalized heroes (Dué 2002:45; see also Nagy 1979:118). In <em>Iliad</em> 9, Achilles, struggling with his mortality, rejects the gifts of Agamemnon and at the same time rejects the glorious death he will have in battle (<em>Iliad</em> 9.410–416). So too do the competitions for the prizes at the funeral games for Patroklos in <em>Iliad</em> 23 have far greater significance than their material value. In <em>Iliad</em> 23.700–737, Ajax and Odysseus compete in wrestling, foreshadowing their competition for the arms of Achilles after his death and for the title of “best of the Achaeans.” In <em>Iliad</em> 23, neither can decisively defeat the other, and eventually Achilles calls the contest a draw, pronouncing that the victory (along with two equal prizes) belongs to both. (The individual contests have been analyzed by various scholars. See e.g. Douglas Frame’s analysis of the chariot race in Frame 2009:131–172 and further bibliography <em>ad loc.</em>) In <em>Iliad</em> 24, Achilles accepts a ransom for Hektor’s body, even though he knows that he too will soon be dead. He asks Patroklos not to be angry with him for accepting it, and says that they will share it equally (<em>Iliad</em> 24.589–595).</p><p>When we understand that prizes are inextricably linked with <em>kleos</em> in this tradition, we can better understand episodes in which heroes act in ways that we might call “selfish,” episodes which are often incompatible with modern notions of heroism (see e.g. Stanford 1965 <em>ad Odyssey</em> 9.229). The <em>Little Iliad</em>, according to Proklos, narrated the theft of the Palladion, a story that survives in several variant versions in which Diomedes or Odysseus or both try to get sole possession of it, betraying the other (see Gantz 1993:643–644). Likewise, Rick Newton (2008 and 2009) has discussed the way that Odysseus seeks gifts at the expense of his comrades throughout his adventures. Newton suggests that, in the <em>Odyssey</em>, guest-gifts function like a <em>geras</em> does in the <br/><em>Iliad</em>: guest-gifts, whatever their intrinsic material value, are tokens of honor and prestige for their recipient (cf. <em>Odyssey</em> 5.29–42 and 11.355–361). Odysseus’ heroic pursuit of guest-gifts generates delays in his homecoming and is instrumental in causing the death of his comrades along the way. See also Newton 2005, especially p. 141: “[In] Odyssean hospitality … the acquisition of property … enhances the honor and status of the hero … But that heroic hospitality, like successful warfare in the Iliad, comes at a price, and a high one … Odysseus will reach Ithaca late and alone.” An analogy can be made between the Iliadic deaths of countless Achaeans due to Achilles’ wrath over his stripped <em>geras</em> and the loss of Odysseus’ entire fleet and crew during his Odyssey <em>nostos</em>.</p><p>Note also that Nestor says there is <em>kleos</em> for undertaking a spying mission, making it parallel to fighting in battle. Nestor promises the sheep and a share at a banquet (see Nagy 1979:118–141 for connections between hero cult and portions at feasts), but the horses of Rhesos also become the reward and a visible sign of the success Diomedes and Odysseus achieve.</p>