+++

tags:
- "Iliad 10 and the Poetics of Ambush"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Iliad.10.248.c5Hk3SP"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:10.248"
title: "Iliad 10.248"

authors:
- email: "mebbott@holycross.edu"
  name: "Mary Ebbott"
  username: "mebbott"
- email: "cldue@central.uh.edu"
  name: "Casey Dué Hackney"
  username: "cldue"
+++

<p>πολύτλας δῖος Ὀδυσσεύς</p><p>In this book Odysseus is also referred to as ὁ τλήμων Ὀδυσεὺς (“that enduring Odysseus,” 10.231 and 10.498; cf. <em>Iliad</em> 5.670 and <em>Odyssey</em> 18.319). Although Odysseus is <em>polutlas</em> ‘much enduring’ five times in the <em>Iliad</em>, the epithet is by far more common in the <em>Odyssey</em>, where it is naturally associated with the many travails he endures in that epic (cf. <em>Odyssey</em> 1.4: πολλὰ δ’ ὅ γ’ ἐν πόντῳ πάθεν ἄλγεα [“many are the pains he suffered”]). It is significant therefore that this formula appears directly following the verse in which Odysseus’ Odyssean association with <em>nostos</em> is conjured. But as we saw in our discussion of the etymologically related epithet τλήμων on 10.231, this formula may well have another aspect to it. When Achilles excoriates Agamemnon in <em>Iliad</em> 1 for his lack of participation in the hardships of war, he says:</p><p>οἰνοβαρές, κυνὸς ὄμματ᾽ ἔχων, κραδίην δ᾽ ἐλάφοιο,</p><p>οὔτέ ποτ᾽ ἐς πόλεμον ἅμα λαῷ θωρηχθῆναι</p><p>οὔτε λόχον δ᾽ ἰέναι σὺν ἀριστήεσσιν Ἀχαιῶν</p><p><strong>τέτληκας</strong> θυμῷ<em>·</em> τὸ δέ τοι κὴρ εἴδεται εἶναι.</p><p><em>Iliad</em> 1.225–228</p><p>“You drunkard, with a dog’s eyes and a deer’s heart,</p><p>whenever it comes to arming yourself for war with the rest of the warriors</p><p>or going on an ambush with the champions of the Achaeans,</p><p>you don’t have the heart to <strong>endure</strong> it. That looks like death to you.”</p><p>The verb Achilles uses is τέτληκα. In Idomeneus’ description of ambush warfare in <em>Iliad</em> 13 (discussed above, pp. 45–47), the verb τλάω is not used, but the need for endurance is likewise emphasized. Warriors on an ambush must endure fear, the discomfort of sitting/crouching as they wait for a long period of time to attack, and the cold of the night (as evidenced by the clothing chosen for ambush, clothing which Odysseus forgets to take both in <em>Iliad</em> 10 and in the story narrated in <em>Odyssey</em> 14). When Menelaos tells Telemakhos the story of the wooden horse in <em>Odyssey</em> 4, he praises Odysseus’ endurance (ἔτλη) on that occasion (<em>Odyssey</em> 4.271–272): οἷον καὶ τόδ’ ἔρεξε καὶ ἔτλη καρτερὸς ἀνὴρ / ἵππῳ ἔνι ξεστῷ (“What a thing he accomplished and endured, the mighty man, inside the wooden horse”). Odysseus’ steadfast character and ability to endure the <em>lokhos</em> are contrasted in Menelaos’ anecdote with that of the weaker-willed heroes, Diomedes, Menelaos himself, and Antiklos, all of whom Odysseus has to restrain from succumbing to Helen’s trick. In Odyssey 9, Odysseus describes how in the cave of the Cyclops he hid beneath the ram and held on, awaiting dawn “with an enduring heart” (τετληότι θυμῷ, 9.435; for this same formula in other ambush contexts, see also <em>Odyssey</em> 4.447 and 4.459, Menelaos’ ambush of Proteus, and <em>Odyssey</em> 24.163, the description by the shades of the suitors of how Odysseus ambushed them). This kind of waiting—during the dark of night, in a hiding position—is what a warrior undergoes in an ambush. When Athena tells Odysseus in <em>Odyssey</em> 13 that he will need to conceal his identity in order to take control of his home, family, and kingdom again, she tells him he will have to endure (σὺ δὲ τετλάμεναι καὶ ἀνάγκῃ, 13.307). He will have to take them by ambush, not outright force. (Cf. Odyssey 13.309–310: ἀλλὰ σιωπῇ / πάσχειν ἄλγεα πολλά, βίας ὑποδέγμενος ἀνδρῶν [“{You must} suffer many pains in silence, submitting to the <em>biē</em> of men.”]) Odysseus’ ability to withstand this particular kind of hardship is an important part of his epithet <em>polutlas</em>, and the endurance that Menelaos remembers as being so remarkable during the ambush of Troy is fundamentally connected to Odysseus’ ability to withstand the many <em>algea</em> he suffers on his journey home. (On the connection between the <em>tla-</em> compounds that describe Odysseus and the endurance required for ambush, see also Edwards 1985:17, and on the second half of the <em>Odyssey</em> as an ambush, see again Edwards 1985:35–37.)  </p>