+++

tags:
- "Iliad 10 and the Poetics of Ambush"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Iliad.10.159.witmybM"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:10.159"
title: "Iliad 10.159"

authors:
- email: "cldue@central.uh.edu"
  name: "Casey Dué Hackney"
  username: "cldue"
- email: "mebbott@holycross.edu"
  name: "Mary Ebbott"
  username: "mebbott"
+++

<p>ὄρσεο  </p><p>The manuscripts are divided between this reading and ἔγρεο. The scholia indicate that Aristarchus had both readings: ὄρσεο· διχῶς ὁ Ἀρίσταρχος, ἔγρεο καὶ ὄρσεο [A intermarginal scholia]; ἔγρεο· γράφεται καὶ ὄρσεο. διχῶς αἱ Ἀριστάρχου [T interlinear scholia]. This is possible because two separate editions or <em>ekdoseis</em> of the text of Homer were attributed to Aristarchus <em>(= </em>αἱ Ἀριστάρχου in the scholia), both of which were known to his student Didymus. From Didymus’ scholarly work many of the scholia derive. (On the <em>ekdoseis</em> of Aristarchus, see Montanari 1998 and Nagy 2004:85–86. On the sources for the Homeric scholia, see Nagy 2004:3–24 and Blackwell and Dué 2009.)</p><p>The sources, both ancient and medieval, are perhaps divided here because both verbs are well attested in the formulaic diction. ἔγρεο occurs here and in two places in the <em>Odyssey</em>; ὄρσεο is attested four times in the <em>Iliad</em> and once in the <em>Odyssey</em>. Clearly, both verbs could be generated by a poet composing in performance. Here is a perfect illustration of the difficulty a modern editor of Homer faces when trying to choose between two or more equally Homeric (= formulaic) variations. We, as the editors of this volume, have for this very reason rejected a traditional text critical approach, and instead have advocated a multitextual approach that accounts for the multiformity of the Homeric poems at different historical points in their transmission. (See above, “<em>Iliad</em> 10: A Multitextual Approach.”)</p>