+++

tags:
- "abduction by gusts of wind"
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"
- "harpuia ‘rapacious gust of wind, Harpy’"
- "Ēōs, goddess of dawn"
- "Kleitos"
- "harpazein ‘snatch, seize’"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.15.250-15.251.De4Lucf"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:15.250-15.251"
title: "Odyssey 15.250-15.251"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>Here at O.15.250–251, Ēōs the goddess of the dawn abducts the beautiful young hero Kleitos by way of ‘snatching’ him away, as expressed by the verb <em>harpazein</em> ‘snatch, seize’. The picturing of such an abduction is part of an overall mythological complex that I analyzed in some detail in GMP 242–245. I epitomize that analysis in what follows:</p><p>Part 1. </p><p>Here is an inventory of verbs expressing the abduction of beautiful heroes by divinities:</p><p>A. Ēōs abducts Kleitos, here at O.15.250: <em>hḗrpasen</em> ‘snatched’</p><p>B. Ēōs abducts Tithōnos, <em>Hymn to Aphrodite</em> 218; <em>hḗrpasen</em> ‘snatched’ (on Ēōs and Tithōnos, see already the comment at O.05.001–002)</p><p>C. Ēōs abducts Orion, O.05.121: <em>héleto</em> ‘seized’ </p><p>D. Ēōs abducts Kephalos, Euripides <em>Hippolytus</em> 455: <em>an-hḗrpasen</em> ‘snatched up’</p><p>E. Aphrodite abducts Phaethon (son of Kephalos), Hesiod <em>Theogony</em> 990: <em>anereipsaménē</em> ‘snatching up’.</p><p>Part 2. </p><p>I draw attention here to a parallelism found in another case of abduction, where <em>Zeus abducts Ganymedes</em>. The parallelism is explicit in the <em>Hymn to Aphrodite</em>, where Aphrodite herself mentions the abduction of Ganymedes by Zeus at lines 202-217 and the abduction of Tithonos by Ēōs at lines 218-238 as precedents for her own seduction of the beautiful hero Anchises. In the <em>Iliad</em>, we find a further detail about the myth of Ganymedes: the gods abduct him for Zeus ‘on account of his beauty, so that he may be with the immortals’, I.20.235 (κάλλεος εἵνεκα οἷο, ἵν’ ἀθανάτοισι μετείη). So also here at O.15.250–251: when Ēōs abducts Kleitos, it is for the same reason: ‘on account of his beauty, so that he may be with the immortals’ (κάλλεος εἵνεκα οἷο, ἵν’ ἀθανάτοισι μετείη). These thematic parallelisms of Ganymedes/Tithōnos and Ganymedes/Kleitos are relevant to the fact that the verb used in the <em>Iliad</em> to describe how the gods abducted Ganymedes is <em>an-ēreípsanto</em> ‘snatched up’, I.20.234. This verb <em>an-ēreípsanto</em>, used here as an aorist indicative, corresponds to the aorist participle <em>an-ereipsaménē</em> ‘snatching up’, which designates how Aphrodite abducted the beautiful hero Phaethon (son of Kephalos) in Hesiod <em>Theogony</em> 990. But how are we to imagine this divine action of ‘snatching up’ a beautiful hero? The answer to this question is signaled at line 208 of the <em>Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite</em>, where the verb that is used to describe the abduction of Ganymedes is <em>an-hḗrpase</em> ‘snatched up’, line 208—and where the subject of the verb is <em>áella</em> ‘gust of wind’. The verb <em>an-hḗrpase</em> ‘snatched up’ at line 208 is coextensive with <em>hḗrpase</em> at line 202—where the subject of this verb is specifically Zeus himself, to be contrasted with the more general <em>theoí</em> ‘gods’, subject of <em>anēreípsanto</em> ‘snatched up’ at I.20.234. Not only in the case of <em>an-ēreípsanto</em> ‘snatched up’ with reference to the abduction of Ganymedes at I.20.234 but also in every other Homeric case of <em>an-ēreípsanto</em> ‘snatched up’, the subject of this verb refers to gusts of wind. In such contexts, we can see that <em>thúella</em> ‘gust of wind’ can be used as a synonym of <em>áella</em> ‘gust of wind’. When Penelope bewails the unknown fate of the absent Telemachus, she says that it was <em>thúellai</em> ‘gusts of wind’ that <em>an-ēreípsanto</em> ‘snatched up’ her son, O.04.727. Further, when Telemachus bewails the unknown fate of the absent Odysseus, he says that it was <em>hárpuiai</em> ‘snatching winds, Harpies’ that <em>an-ēreípsanto</em> ‘snatched up’ his absent father, O.01.241. The same expression is used when Eumaios bewails the unknown fate of the absent Odysseus, O.14.371. In general, the meaning of <em>thúella</em> ‘gust of wind’ is coextensive with the meaning of <em>hárpuia</em> ‘snatching wind, Harpy’: see the comments at O.20.061–080, where we find the combination of <em>thuéllai</em> ‘gusts of wind’ with <em>an-hélonto</em> ‘seized’ at O.20.066. Comparable is the combination of Ēṓs with <em>héleto</em> ‘seized’ at O.05.121—where Ēōs the goddess of the dawn abducts Orion. In the context of O.20.061–080, as highlighted in the comments on those lines, the combination of <em>thuéllai</em> ‘gusts of wind’ with <em>an-hélonto</em> ‘seized’ at O.20.066 is then restated at O.20.077 by way combining <em>hárpuiai</em> ‘snatching winds, Harpies’ with <em>an-ēreípsanto</em> ‘snatched up’.  By now I have accounted for all the Homeric attestations of <em>anēreípsanto</em> ‘snatched up’ as also for the solitary Hesiodic attestation of <em>anereipsaménē</em> ‘snatching up’.</p><p>Part 3.</p><p>As for <em>hárpuia</em> ‘snatching wind, Harpy’, the only other Homeric attestation besides those already surveyed in Part 2 is in the <em>Iliad</em>. At I.16.149–151, we see that a <em>hárpuia</em> ‘Harpy’ by the name of <em>Podárgē</em>, meaning ‘swift of foot’, was the mother of Xanthos and Balios, horses of Achilles, while the father of these horses was Zephyros the West Wind. In this connection, we may consider the Hesiodic description of the <em>hárpuiai</em> ‘snatching winds’ or ‘Harpies’, two in number, in <em>Theogony</em> 267–269: one is named <em>Aellṓ</em>, line 267, from <em>áella</em> ‘gust of wind’, and the other, <em>Ōkupétē</em>, the one who is ‘swiftly flying’, line 267. In short, the epic attestations of <em>hárpuia</em> betray a regular association with wind. Furthermore, this noun <em>hárpuia</em> may be formally connected with the verb transmitted as ἀνηρείψαντο ‘snatched up’ and ἀνερειψαμένη ‘snatching up’ in Homeric and Hesiodic diction respectively, as surveyed in Part 2: a decisive piece of evidence is a variant of <em>hárpuia</em>, shaped <em>arepuîa</em> (ἀρεπυῖα), attested in the <em>Etymologicum Magnum</em> (138.21) and on a vase inscription from Aegina (dual αρεπυια, see DELG under ῞Αρπυια).</p><p>Part 4.</p><p>On the basis of these surveys in Parts 1–3, we can see how beautiful young heroes like Kleitos, Tithōnos, Orion, Kephalos, Phaethon, and Ganymedes were abducted: in the poetic imagination, <em>they were snatched away by gusts of wind</em>. The imagery is most explicit in the story of Ganymedes. The <em>immediate agent</em> of the abduction is a gust of wind, and the father of Ganymedes does not know what happened to his son after the <em>áella</em> ‘gust of wind’ ‘snatched [him] up’, <em>an-ḗrpase</em>, as we read at line 208 of the <em>Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite</em>. We should observe, however, that the <em>ultimate agent</em> is Zeus himself, who is the subject of the verb <em>hḗrpasen</em> ‘snatched’ designating the abduction of Ganymedes at line 203 of the <em>Hymn to Aphrodite</em>. As compensation for the abduction of Ganymedes, Zeus eventually gives to the boy’s father a team of wondrous horses, lines 210-211, who are described as <em>aellópodes</em> ‘having gusts of wind as their feet’, line 217 (ἀελλοπόδεσσιν). In this instance, both the action of <em>taking</em> and the action of <em>giving in return</em> center on the element of wind. But now, after having ascertained <em>how</em> such heroes were abducted, we may still ask <em>where</em> they were taken. In some cases, we can see that the outcome is positive, as when Ganymedes is taken to Olympus. In other cases, however, where a crossing of the cosmic river Ōkeanos is involved, the outcome may be either positive or negative.  A case in point is a complicated passage at O.20.061–080, which I will analyze when I reach my comment on those lines, though I highlight already here a relevant detail. When Penelope wishes for a gust of wind to snatch her up and drop her into the Ōkeanos, O.20.063–065, the <em>immediate agent</em> is a <em>thúella</em> ‘gust of wind’, O.20.063, though the <em>ultimate agents</em> are the gods themselves, O.20.079. This linking of the Ōkeanos at O.20.063–065 with the wished-for abduction of Penelope by gusts of wind is relevant to what we read at I.16.149–151: in is on the banks of this cosmic river Ōkeanos that the <em>hárpuia</em> ‘Harpy’ named <em>Podárgē</em> ‘swift of foot’ gave birth to the wind-horses of Achilles. See the comment at Part 3 above. I note also that a variant reading for Ὠκεανοῖο ‘Ōkeanos’ at I.16.151 is Ἠριδανοῖο ‘Ēridanos’. </p>