+++

tags:
- "kleos"
- "phrenes ‘heart, thinking’"
- "aoidē ‘song’"
- "Reciprocal exchange"
- "kharis"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.24.192-24.202.RjXdpxM"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:24.192-24.202"
title: "Odyssey 24.192-202"

authors:
- email: "nikkanen@fas.harvard.edu"
  name: "Anita Nikkanen"
  username: "anikkanen"
+++

<p>  </p><p>These words of Agamemnon show that the likeminded couple, Penelope and Odysseus (cp. O.6.181-184), is worthy of <a class="comment-cross-ref" href="/tags/kleos">#kleos</a>, a glorious epic song – and what is more, this <em>kleos</em> is characterized by <a class="comment-cross-ref" href="/tags/kharis">#kharis</a>. His praise makes the source of <em>kleos</em> in the <em>Odyssey</em> explicit. It is the mind (<em>phrenes</em>, O.24.194) of Penelope and her remembering Odysseus (O.24.195) that is worthy of celebration. And it is, again, a <em>much contriving</em> Odysseus (O.24.192), his epithet pointing to his mental abilities, who has the luck of having Penelope as his wife. Although what exactly the <em>arēte</em>, ‘excellence’ (O.24.193, O.24.197), that both gives rise to this song and is its subject, is <em>in</em>, is left somewhat ambiguous, or even whether it is the <em>arēte</em> of Penelope or Odysseus – or, as I would like to take it, of the couple together – we can see that mental abilities are central to it, and throughout the <em>Odyssey</em>, the couple standing out for theirs are Penelope and Odysseus. </p><p>Further, Agamemnon’s words show the connection between the worthy achievements and their commemoration in song very clearly. Agamemnon speaks specifically of songs and reputation conveyed through them, contrasting Penelope with Klytaimestra. The balance of the comparison of the two women creates an effect of symmetrical opposition. As Penelope is called <em>κούρῃ Ἰκαρίου</em>, “daughter of Ikarios” (O.24.195), so Klytaimestra is <em>Τυνδαρέου κούρη</em>, “daughter of Tyndareos” (O.24.199), both named through their fathers, but with the word order reversed as if to draw out the contrast between them. While Penelope <em>εὖ μέμνητ’ Ὀδυσῆος, / ἀνδρὸς κουριδίου</em>, “well remembered Odysseus, her wedded husband” (O.24.195-196), Klytaimestra <em>κακὰ μήσατο ἔργα, / κουρίδιον κτείνασα πόσιν</em>, “devised her evil deeds, killing her wedded husband” (O.24.199-200). In both cases, the object of the wife’s action is her respective husband, both times qualified by “wedded” (there is perhaps even a suggestion of further parallelism in the alliterative echoing in <em>memnēt’</em>, ‘remembered’, and <em>mēsato</em>, ‘devised’). As Penelope occasions <em>κλέος</em>, “song of glory,” and <em>ἀοιδὴν / […] χαρίεσσαν</em>, “<em>kharis</em>-filled song,” to delight mortals (O.24.196-198), so Klytaimestra gives rise to <em>στυγερὴ […] ἀοιδὴ</em>, “hateful song,” among humans (O.24.200-201), the words and phrases mirroring one another again. The parallelism and even repetitions of specific words and phrases concretely demonstrates the opposition between the two kinds of song, the praise poetry of epic on one hand, and the blame poetry on the other. </p><p>Finally, <em>khalepe</em>, ‘grievous’, ‘harsh’, ‘hard to bear’, that qualifies the repute Klytaimestra gives women is the same word as we have seen in Mentor’s speech qualifying the harsh (<em>khalepos</em>, O.2.232) king that he takes the Ithacans to deserve for not remembering Odysseus. Therefore, in the polarities between good, ethical conduct and memory on the one hand and bad behavior and incurrence of <em>mēnis</em> on the other, Klytaimestra’s song would fall on the side of the latter, leading to grief and pain. If we compare this picture with that presented by Odysseus in his wishes for a happy marriage to Nausikaa, we can see that this pain aligns with the <em>algea</em>, ‘griefs’, suffered by the enemies of the ideal likeminded couple (O.6.184). In contrast, the good person’s praise poetry in Agamemnon’s exclamation is characterized by <em>kharis</em>: the <em>kleos</em> is an <em>aoidē khariessa</em>, a ‘<em>kharis</em>-filled song’ (O.24.197-198), just as the likemindedness of the couple in Odysseus’ wishes for Nausikaa is the cause of <em>kharmata</em>, ‘source of joy’ (O.24.185), for their well-wishers. And here we have one such well-wisher, Agamemnon, exclaiming on the happiness of Odysseus and Penelope, and even calling their <em>kleos</em> <em>kharis</em>-filled himself. </p><p>See further: </p><p>Nagy, Gregory. 1974. <em>Comparative Studies in Greek and Indic Meter</em>. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. </p><p>_______. 1979. <em>The Best of the Achaeans: Concepts of the hero in Archaic Greek Poetry</em>. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. Revised edition, 1999. </p>