+++

tags:
- "sēma ‘sign, signal; tomb’"
- "coincidence of opposites"
- "plot of an odyssey beyond the Odyssey"
- "prophecy of Teiresias"
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.11.119-11.137.D9XKHxH"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:11.119-11.137"
title: "Odyssey 11.119-11.137"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>This stretch of the prophecy made by Teiresias, O.119–137, will extend beyond the plot or narrative frame of the <em>Odyssey</em> as we know it. (What follows is an epitome of H24H 11§§33, 41–44.) In an essay entitled “<em>Sēma</em> and <em>Noēsis</em>: The Hero’s Tomb and the ‘Reading’ of Symbols in Homer and Hesiod” (GMP 202–222), I analyzed at some length the mystical prophecy spoken by the <em>psūkhē</em> ‘spirit’ of the <em>mantis</em> ‘seer’ Teiresias at O.11.119–137 about an odyssey beyond the <em>Odyssey</em>. As I argued in that essay, the verses of this prophecy point to the future death of Odysseus and to the mystical vision of his own tomb, where he will be worshipped as a cult hero. My argument can be divided into four parts:</p><p>Part 1. </p><p>Teiresias is predicting that Odysseus will meet his death in a mystical moment where he experiences <em>a coincidence of opposites</em>. And what is this mystical moment? It is a point where <u>the sea and the negation of the sea coincide</u>. That is, <u>Odysseus goes as far away as possible from the sea, only to experience death from the sea</u>: ‘death shall come to you from the sea, |135 a gentle death’, O.11.134-135. See the comment below on these lines. At this same point, where  the sea and the negation of the sea coincide, the oar that he carries on his shoulder, which is an instrument linked exclusively with the sea, will be mistaken for a winnowing shovel, which is an instrument linked exclusively with the earth, that is, with the cultivation of the land: ‘Whenever someone on the road encounters you |128 and says that it must be a winnowing shovel that you have on your radiant shoulder’, O.11.127-128. And here is another coincidence of opposites: Odysseus at this point must sacrifice to Poseidon, god of the sea, O.11.130-131, even though this point is as far away from the sea as possible. </p><p>Part 2.</p><p>And now we come to a mystical vision: in sacrificing to Poseidon, Odysseus must mark the place of sacrifice by sticking into the ground the oar that he was carrying on his shoulder: ‘at that point you must stick into the ground the well-made oar’, O.11.129. As I will now argue, what we are seeing here is a mystical vision of the tomb of Odysseus himself. The key to my argument is what the <em>psūkhē</em> of Teiresias says in introducing his prophecy: ‘And I [= Teiresias] will tell you [= Odysseus] a sign [<em>sēma</em>], a very clear one, which will not get lost in your thinking’, O.11.126. The wording here matches exactly the wording of Nestor addressed to Antilokhos in the <em>Iliad</em>: ‘And I [= Nestor] will tell you [= Antilokhos] a sign [<em>sēma</em>], a very clear one, which will not get lost in your thinking’, I.23.326. In that case, it can be argued that the <em>sēma</em> of Nestor for Antilokhos is a ‘sign’ as marked by the ‘tomb’ of a cult hero who has not yet been identified as Patroklos. See the comment on I.23.326–343. In the <em>Odyssey</em> as well, I argue, the <em>sēma</em> of Teiresias for Odysseus is a ‘sign’ as marked by the ‘tomb’ of a cult hero who has not yet been identified as Odysseus himself.</p><p>Part 3.</p><p>There is archaeological evidence for the existence of a hero cult of Odysseus on the island of Ithaca, dating back to an early period when the <em>Odyssey</em> as we know it was still taking shape (H24H 11§43). And, in the version of the story as we see it in the <em>Odyssey</em>, Odysseus dies finally in Ithaca, which figures here as his homeland, O.11.132–137. In terms of this version of the story, then, Ithaca is recognized in the <em>Odyssey</em> as a prime location for the hero cult of Odysseus.</p><p>Part 4.</p><p>This is not to say, however, that Ithaca was the only place where Odysseus was worshipped as a cult hero. From the testimony of Pausanias 8.44.4, for example, we see traces of a hero cult of Odysseus in landlocked Arcadia, which is located in the Peloponnesus and which is as far away from the sea as you can possibly be in the Peloponnesus. Here is the relevant testimony of Pausanias 8.44.4:</p><p>ἔστι δὲ ἄνοδος ἐξ Ἀσέας ἐς τὸ ὄρος τὸ Βόρειον καλούμενον, καὶ ἐπὶ τῇ ἄκρᾳ τοῦ ὄρους σημεῖά ἐστιν ἱεροῦ· ποιῆσαι δὲ τὸ ἱερὸν Ἀθηνᾷ τε Σωτείρᾳ καὶ Ποσειδῶνι Ὀδυσσέα ἐλέγετο ἀνακομισθέντα ἐξ Ἰλίου.</p><p>There is a path leading uphill from Asea [in Arcadia] to the mountain called the North Mountain [<em>Boreion</em>], and on top of that mountain there are traces of a sacred space; it is said that Odysseus had made this sacred space in honor of Athena the Savior [<em>sōteira</em>] and in honor of Poseidon, in return for his having arrived back home safely from Ilion [= Troy]. </p>