+++

tags:
- "Aiaia"
- "coincidence of opposites"
- "Circe"
- "name of Circe"
- "&quot;speaking name&quot; (nomen loquens)"
- "Ōkeanos"
- "khoros &#39;place for choral singing/ dancing&#39;"
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.12.1-12.4.TxxXuow"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:12.1-12.4"
title: "Odyssey 12.001-12.004"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>Part 1.</p><p>After his sojourn in Hādēs, which is narrated in <em>Odyssey</em> 11, here at the beginning of <em>Odyssey</em> 12 Odysseus finally emerges from that realm of darkness and death. As Odysseus now returns from Hādēs, crossing again the circular cosmic stream of Ōkeanos at O.12.001–002 and coming back to his point of departure, that is, to the island of the goddess Circe at O.12.003, we find that this island is no longer in the Far West: instead, it is now in the Far East, where Hēlios the god of the sun has his ‘sunrises’, <em>an(a)tolai</em>, O.12.004, and where Ēōs the goddess of the dawn has her own palace, featuring a special space for her ‘choral singing-and-dancing’, <em>khoroi</em>, O.12.003–004. Before the hero’s descent into the realm of darkness and death, we saw the Ōkeanos as the absolute marker of the Far West; after his ascent into the realm of light and life, we see it as the absolute marker of the Far East (GM 237). <em>In returning to the island of Circe by crossing the circular cosmic river Ōkeanos for the second time, the hero has come full circle, experiencing sunrise after having experienced sunset</em>. Even the name of Circe may be relevant, since the form <em>Kirkē</em> may be cognate with the form <em>kirkos</em>, a variant of the noun <em>krikos</em>, meaning ‘circle, ring’ (DELG under κρίκος). As we will now see, this experience of coming full circle is a mental experience—or, to put it another way, it is a psychic experience.</p><p>Part 2.</p><p>The return of Odysseus to light and life replicates the mystical journey of the sun as it travels every night from the Far West to the Far East, and thus the hero’s return becomes a substitute for the mystical journey of a soul. This way, the <em>nostos</em> ‘return’ of Odysseus, as an epic narrative, becomes interwoven with a mystical subnarrative. While the epic narrative tells about the hero’s return to Ithaca after all the fighting at Troy and all the travels at sea, the mystical subnarrative tells about the soul’s return from darkness and death to light and life. </p><p>Part 3. </p><p>In some poetic traditions, the mystical subnarrative of the hero’s <em>nostos</em> can even be foregrounded, as in these verses of Theognis (1123–1128):</p><p>|1123 μή με κακῶν μίμνησκε· πέπονθά τοι οἷά τ’ Ὀδυσσεύς, |1124 ὅστ’ Ἀίδεω μέγα δῶμ’ ἤλυθεν ἐξαναδύς, |1125 ὃς δὴ καὶ μνηστῆρας ἀνείλατο νηλέι θυμῷ, |1126 Πηνελόπης εὔφρων κουριδίης ἀλόχου, |1127 ἥ μιν δήθ’ ὑπέμεινε φίλῳ παρὰ παιδὶ μένουσα, |1128 ὄφρα τε γῆς ἐπέβη δείλ’ ἁλίους τε μυχούς.</p><p>|1123 Do not remind me of my misfortunes! The kinds of things that happened to Odysseus have happened to me too. |1124 He came back, emerging from the great palace of Hādēs, |1125 and then killed the suitors with a pitiless heart [<em>thūmos</em>], |1126 while thinking good thoughts about his duly wedded wife Penelope, |1127 who all along waited for him and stood by their dear son |1128 while he [= Odysseus] was experiencing dangers on land and in the gaping chasms of the sea.</p><p>Part 4.</p><p>The return of Odysseus from Hādēs leads to a rebuilding of his heroic identity. Earlier in the <em>Odyssey</em>, the status of Odysseus as a hero of epic had already been reduced to nothing. As we saw in the tale of his encounter with the Cyclops, the return of Odysseus from the monster’s cave deprives him of his past identity at Troy. His epic fame can no longer depend on his power of <em>mētis</em>, ‘craft’, which had led to the invention of the Wooden Horse, which in turn had led to the destruction of Troy. After his encounter with the Cyclops, Odysseus must achieve a new epic identity as the hero of his own epic about homecoming, about his own <em>nostos</em>, but, for the moment, his confidence in his power to bring about this <em>nostos</em> is reduced to nothing. He has lost his confidence in the power of his own <em>mētis</em>, ‘craftiness’, to devise a stratagem for achieving a <em>nostos</em>. When he reaches the island of Circe and learns that this place, though it first seems familiar and reminiscent of his own island, is in fact strange and alien and antithetical to home, he despairs, as we saw at O.10.189-202.</p><p>Part 5.</p><p>Despite such moments of disorientation for Odysseus, his <em>nóos</em>, ‘thinking’, will ultimately reorient him, steering him away from his Iliadic past and toward his ultimate Odyssean future. That is, the hero’s <em>nóos</em> will makes it possible for him to achieve a <em>nostos</em>, which is not only his ‘homecoming’ but also the ‘song about a homecoming’ that is the <em>Odyssey</em>. For this song to succeed, Odysseus must keep adapting his identity by making his <em>nóos</em> fit the <em>nóos</em> of the many different characters he encounters in the course of his <em>nostos</em> in progress. In order to adapt, he must master many different forms of discourse. The epithet for this ability to adapt, as we will see, is <em>poluainos</em>, ‘having many different kinds of coded message’: that is how, as we will see, Odysseus is described by the Sirens when he sails past their island, O.12.184).</p><p>[[GN 2017.06.15 via BA 206, GMP 237, PH 236–237.]]</p>