+++

tags:
- "dominant vs. recessive versions of myths"
- "nostos &#39;homecoming, song of homecoming&#39;"
- "eris  &#39;strife&#39;"
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"
- "mutually contradictory local variations in mythmaking"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.3.130-3.183.SqMzs42"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:3.130-3.183"
title: "Odyssey 3.130-3.183/ Anchor Comment on two variant myths in Odyssey 3 and Odyssey 4, part 1"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>Epitomized from Nagy 2015 §§69–75: </p><p>[§69] In <em>Odyssey</em> O.03.130–183, old Nestor is telling a tale to young Telemachus about the various homecomings of the Achaeans after they succeeded in conquering the city of Troy. (Nestor’s tales of homecoming in <em>Odyssey</em> 3 reflect poetic traditions of great antiquity, which are analyzed most incisively and intuitively by Frame 2009:180–193.) The tale is told from the perspective of Nestor’s own experiences. My point of departure is a detail at O.03.169, where Nestor says that he and a group of his fellow Achaeans stopped over at the island of Lesbos on their way home from Troy, O.03.169. One time before and one time after their stopover at Lesbos, Nestor and his group participated in making sacrifices. The story about the first of these two sacrifices, as we will see [§75], contradicts a story in Song 17 of Sappho, which tells about a single sacrifice that involves Agamemnon and Menelaos. </p><p>[§70] The first of the two sacrifices mentioned by Nestor in <em>Odyssey</em> 3 takes place at the island of Tenedos, O.03.159, which is situated directly to the west of Troy. By contrast, the island of Lesbos is further away, to the southwest of the Trojan coastland. In <em>Odyssey</em> 3, the divine recipients of the sacrifice at Tenedos are designated only in general terms, as <em>theoi</em> ‘the gods’, O.03.159. Then, continuing their voyage back home from Troy, Nestor and his group set sail from Tenedos, and their next stopover, as already noted, is the island of Lesbos, O.03.169. </p><p>[§71] After their stopover at Lesbos, O.03.169, Nestor and his group continued their sea voyage back home. Next, they sailed over the open sea, with no more stopovers, until they reached the city of Geraistos, at the southern tip of the island of Euboea, O.03.177. By now the homecoming of this group of heroes was nearly complete, since the island of Euboea is situated right next to the European mainland. And here, at Euboea, Nestor participated in the second of the two sacrifices to which I have been referring, O.03.178–179. This second sacrifice involving Nestor was meant as a signal of thanksgiving for the successful homecoming of his group of Achaean voyagers, and the divine recipient of the sacrifice here is specified as the god Poseidon, O.03.178, whom Nestor and his fellow Achaeans honored by slaughtering, according to his tale, a multitude of bulls, O.03.178–179. </p><p>[§72] So, the second sacrifice attended by Nestor and his group, which took place on the island of Euboea, was a success. But the first sacrifice, which he had also attended and which had taken place on the island of Tenedos, was a failure. The failure, as narrated by Nestor in <em>Odyssey</em> 3, can be linked with a quarrel that broke out, evidently in the context of the feasting that followed this first sacrifice. The quarrel is marked by the word <em>eris</em> ‘strife’, O.03.160. Compare the words <em>erizein</em> ‘have strife’ at I.01.006 and <em>eris</em> ‘strife’ at I.01.008, with reference to the quarrel between Achilles and Agamemnon. In the case of the <em>eris</em> ‘strife’ at O.03.160, who quarreled with whom? The narrative answers the question: the two heroes who quarreled with each other were Nestor and Odysseus, O.03.161–166.</p><p>[§73] This quarrel between Nestor and Odysseus, O.03.161–166, cannot be understood without first considering an earlier quarrel that is central to the narration of <em>Odyssey</em> 3, and the narrator is once again Nestor. According to the tale as Nestor tells it, the two Sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaos, had quarreled with each other right after their victory at Troy. In this case as well, quarrel is marked by the word <em>eris</em> ‘strife’, O.03.136. And, as a result of this quarrel, all the Achaeans had split into two groups, so that half of them followed Menelaos as he sailed off from Troy to Tenedos while the other half stayed with Agamemnon at Troy, O.03.130–158. In terms of this story, <em>Agamemnon intended to perform a sacrifice of one hundred cattle to the goddess Athena before leaving Troy</em>, O.03.143–144, but Menelaos, leading half of the Achaeans, had sailed off together with Nestor and Odysseus and Diomedes <em>before such a sacrifice could take place</em>, O.03.153–154. It was only after Menelaos and his half of the Achaeans stopped over at the nearby island of Tenedos that they arranged for their own sacrifice there, O.03.159. And it was there at Tenedos that a second quarrel broke out—the quarrel between Nestor and Odysseus, O.03.161–166. </p><p>[§74] This second quarrel in the tale told by Nestor in <em>Odyssey</em> 3 resulted in a splitting of the group that had sided with Menelaos after the original splitting of all the Achaeans into one separate group siding with Menelaos and another separate group siding with Agamemnon. What resulted from the new split after the quarrel between Nestor and Odysseus was that Odysseus, together with his followers, now sailed off from Tenedos back to Troy in order to rejoin Agamemnon there, O.03.160–164, while Nestor together with Diomedes sailed on from their stopover at the island of Tenedos and arrived with their followers at the next stopover, at the island of Lesbos, O.03.165–169. When Nestor and Diomedes were already at Lesbos, O.03.169, they were joined there by Menelaos, <em>who arrived later</em>, O.03.168.</p><p>[§75] And here I stop to highlight the contradiction between the story as told here in the <em>Odyssey</em> and the story as told in Song 17 of Sappho. In the <em>Odyssey</em>, we see that Menelaos came to Lesbos, but there is no mention here of Agamemnon. In Song 17, by contrast, it seems that both brothers came to Lesbos [Nagy 2015 §50]:</p><p>|1 πλάϲιον δη μ̣[.....]...οιϲ᾿ α̣[ ̣ ̣ ̣ ̣]ω |2 πότνι’ Ἦρα, ϲὰ χ[…..]ϲ̣  ̣ἐόρτ[α] |3 τὰν ἀράταν Ἀτρ[έϊδα]ι̣ π̣ό̣ηϲαν |4 τόι βαϲίληεϲ, |5 ἐκτελέϲϲαντεϲ μ[εγά]λ̣οιϲ ἀέθλοιϲ̣ |6 πρῶτα μὲν πὲρ Ἴ̣[λιον]· ἄψερον δέ̣ |7 τυίδ’ ἀπορμάθεν[τεϲ, ὄ]δ̣ο̣ν γὰρ̣ εὔρη̣[ν] |8 οὐκ ἐδ[ύναντο⌋, |9 πρὶν ϲὲ καὶ Δί’ ἀντ[ίαον] π̣εδέλθην̣ |10 καὶ Θυώναϲ ἰμε̣[ρόεντα] π̣αῖδα· |11 νῦν δὲ κ[αί..... …] ]...πόημεν |12 κὰτ τὸ πάλ̣[αιον {464|465} |13 ἄγνα καὶ κα̣[..... ὄ]χλοϲ |14 παρθέ[νων..... γ]υναίκων |15 ἀμφιϲ̣.[…] |16 μετρ’ ὀ̣λ̣[ολύγαϲ].</p><p>|1 Close by, …, |2 O Queen [<em>potnia</em>] Hera, … your […] festival [<em>eortā</em>], |3 which, vowed-in-prayer [<em>arâsthai</em>], the Sons of Atreus did arrange [<em>poieîn</em>] |4 for you, kings that they were, |5 after first having completed great labors [<em>aethloi</em>], |6 around Troy, and, next [<em>apseron</em>], |7 after having set forth to come here [<em>tuide</em>], since finding the way |8 was not possible for them |9 until they would approach you (Hera) and Zeus lord of suppliants [<em>antiaos</em>] |10 and (Dionysus) the lovely son of Thyone. |11 And now we are arranging [<em>poieîn</em>] [the festival], |12 in accordance with the ancient way […] |13 holy [<em>agna</em>] and […] a throng [<em>okhlos</em>] |14 of girls [<em>parthenoi</em>] […] and women [<em>gunaikes</em>] |15 on either side … |16 the measured sound of ululation [<em>ololūgā</em>]. </p><p>Sappho Song 17.1–16</p><p>On the reading τόι (with the acute accent preserved in P.GC inv. 105 fr. 2) , see Nagy 2015 §50.</p>