+++


citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.7.78-7.81.ujBRrTR"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:7.78-7.81"
title: "name of goddess X, name of place X ruled by goddess X"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>The name <em>Athḗnē</em> applies both to the goddess known in English as ‘Athena’, as at <em>Odyssey</em> 7.78, and to the place that is seen as the possession of the goddess—which is the territory of the place known in English as ‘Athens’, as at <em>Odyssey</em> 7.80.<a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftn1" name="_ftnref1">[1]</a> The suffix <em>-ḗnē</em> is visible also in the name of the nymph <em>Mukḗnē</em>, who presides over the acropolis of Mycenae.<a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftn2" name="_ftnref2">[2]</a></p>
<p>The same suffix <em>-ḗnē</em> is visible also in the place-name <em>Messḗnē</em>, which means something like ‘Midland’.<a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftn3" name="_ftnref3">[3]</a> Here I compare the place-name <em>me-za-na</em> written on a Linear B tablet from Pylos, Cn 3.1. On the basis of this comparison, I have observed: “I suspect that the suffix <em>-ḗnē</em> is endowed with an elliptic function.”<a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftn4" name="_ftnref4">[4]</a> What I meant is this: a form that is elliptic refers not only to X but also to everything that belongs to X, such as X2, X3, X4 etc. An elliptic form of X implies X2, X3, X4 etc. without naming X2, X3, X4 etc. explicitly. In terms of this definition, the name <em>Athḗnē</em> refers not only to the goddess ‘Athena’ but also to everything that belongs to the goddess. The primary example of that ‘everything’ in this context is the acropolis of Athens. And we see another level of ellipsis in the plural form <em>Athênai</em>: this elliptic plural refers not only to the acropolis of Athens but also to everything that belongs to the acropolis of Athens, which is the city of Athens, and, by extension, to everything that belongs to the city, which is ultimately the region of Attica.<a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftn5" name="_ftnref5">[5]</a></p>
<p>I see a parallel situation in the use of the form <em>Aswia</em> (/<em>Aswiās</em>) in the Linear B texts, where Aswia is evidently a goddess, as we see from the collocation <em>po-ti-ni-ja a-si-wi-ja</em> = <em>potnia Aswia</em> ‘[Our] Lady Aswia’ as written on a tablet from Pylos, Fr 1208. In the case of Aswia, the name survives into the classical period of recorded texts in the fifth century BCE and later: now the name is pronounced <em>Asíā</em>, meaning ‘Asia’, and the referent here is what we call ‘Asia Minor’ in English. So, from a diachronic perspective, this name applies both to the goddess and to the realm of the goddess. She is ‘Our Lady of Asia’ or ‘Asia’ personified.</p>
<p>I emphasize here that the form <em>Athḗnē</em> at line 80 of <em>Odyssey</em> 7 is the only instance, in all surviving texts ever written in the ancient Greek language, where the name of  the place ‘Athens’ is found in the singular, not in the plural. Everywhere else in attested Greek, we read the elliptic plural <em>Athênai</em>, which I now interpret to mean ‘everything that belongs to the acropolis of <em>Athḗnē</em>’. And there is also a deeper level of ellipsis here: the suffix <em>-ḗnē</em> of <em>Athḗnē</em> indicates that the goddess Athena is also a personification of the place of Athena, which is the acropolis of Athens and, by extension, the city of Athens, and by further extension, everything that belongs to the city of Athens.</p>
<p><a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftnref1" name="_ftn1">[1]</a> Commentary in Nagy 2004:159-164.</p>
<p><a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftnref2" name="_ftn2">[2]</a> See Nagy 2004:163; also Palaiologou 2013:250n5. </p>
<p><a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftnref3" name="_ftn3">[3]</a> Nagy 2004:163n17.</p>
<p><a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftnref4" name="_ftn4">[4]</a> Again, Nagy 2004:163n17.</p>
<p><a href="x-webdoc://02EEC853-5C1F-4478-8173-E7660B646557/#_ftnref5" name="_ftn5">[5]</a> See also Muellner 1976:70, who notes that the singular form of <em>Athḗnē</em> vs. the plural form <em>Athênai</em> can in fact refer to the place that we know as 'Athens'. Muellner also analyzes here the elliptic function of the plural form here. On the elliptic plural in general, see Nagy 2004:157-175.</p>