+++

tags:
- "Reciprocal exchange"
- "Hesiod"
- "menis &#39;anger&#39;"
- "mimnēskein - mimnēskesthai"
- "aidōs"
- "kharis"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.21.11-21.41.mBwkafw"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:21.11-21.41"
title: "Odyssey 21.11-41"

authors:
- email: "nikkanen@fas.harvard.edu"
  name: "Anita Nikkanen"
  username: "anikkanen"
+++

<p>  </p><p>The inset narrative of how Odysseus came to have the bow that Penelope challenges the suitors to string and shoot with in order to win her hand has (as often for inset narratives in the Homeric poems) layers of meaning relevant to the main narrative. The bow is a gift of friendship from Iphitus, whom Odysseus meets while in Messene to collect a debt owed by the Messenians: they had taken three hundred sheep and their shepherds from Ithaca. Iphitus likewise is in search of twelve lost mares. The situation framing their encounter sets out a model for how reciprocation should work, even if “negative” as here, starting in theft: Odysseus is due recompense for the three hundred sheep and their shepherds. The theft of the sheep and shepherds parallels the suitors’ slaughtering of and feasting on Odysseus’ livestock and abuse of his household. </p><p></p><p>The suitable recompense for the suitors’ arrogance is foreshadowed in the story of the bow, as well. The twelve mares that Iphitus has come to reclaim turn out to be his undoing when Herakles kills him to keep the mares. Herakles does this while a guest in Iphitus’ house, without regard for the fact that he is offered food there – and without regard for the <em>opis </em>of the gods (<em>Od</em>. 21.28: <em>σχέτλιος, οὐδὲ θεῶν ὄπιν αἰδέσατ’</em>, “merciless one, and he did not fear the <em>opis</em> of gods”). Watkins (1977) has shown that <em>opis</em> is synonymous with <em>mēnis</em>. In comparing this line with a nearly identical one in Hesiod’s <em>Works and Days</em> (<em>σχέτλιοι, οὐδὲ θεῶν ὄπιν εἰδότες</em>, “merciless ones, and they did not know the <em>opis</em> of gods,” 187) where the transgressions incurring the <em>opis</em> are also listed<em>, </em>it is evident that divine retribution for transgression against the rules that maintain the cosmic order is meant. The scene between Herakles and Iphitus is one of hospitality (<em>Od</em>. 21.28-29), which parallels the situation between the suitors and Odysseus in the main narrative. Just as Herakles in the inset narrative breaks the rules of hospitality, so in the framing narrative do the suitors. Where the inset narrative contrasts with the main narrative is in the punishment: unlike Herakles, the suitors do not get out scot-free. The instrument of their undoing is the bow, the weapon that gives rise to this inset narrative. It is a gift of friendship (<em>Od</em>. 21.35), and as Seaford (1994) notes, it embodies the relationship of guest-friendship and the rules of hospitality; as such, it is an appropriate punisher for the abuse of hospitality. I would like to add that we are even told that Odysseus does not take this bow with him when he goes to Troy, but leaves it at home as a <em>μνῆμα ξείνοιο φίλοιο</em>, “a reminder of a dear guest-friend” (<em>Odyssey</em> 21.40). Appropriately, in a further way, then, the instrument of the suitors’ punishment embodies also the memory that leads to good conduct as a marker and upholder of a relationship of exchanging <em>kharites</em>, the reciprocal exchange of good turns. </p><p></p><p>  </p><p>See further: </p><p></p><p>Muellner, Leonard. 1996. <em>The Anger of Achilles: Mênis in Greek Epic</em>. Ithaca; London: Cornell University Press. (see pp. 36, 40, 187 on <em>opis</em> = <em>mēnis</em> and applications of Watkins’ argument)</p><p></p><p>Seaford, Richard. 1994. <em>Reciprocity and Ritual: Homer and Tragedy in the Developing City-State</em>. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press.</p><p></p><p>Watkins, Calvert. 1977. “On Μῆνις.” <em>Indo-European Studies</em> 3:686-722. (see pp. 708-709, where he posits “a virtual semantic identity” between <em>theōn opis</em> and <em>theōn mēnis)</em></p><p></p><p>West, Martin Litchfield, ed. 1966. Hesiod, <em>Theogony</em>. Oxford: Clarendon Press. (see p. 230 on <em>Theogony </em>222 for <em>theōn opis</em> in Hesiod as meaning divine punishment rather than mere divine regard)</p>