+++

tags:
- "mēnis"
- "thēmis"
- "Reciprocal exchange"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.2.63-2.79.c8aLsp9"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:2.63-2.79"
title: "Odyssey 2.63-79"

authors:
- email: "nikkanen@fas.harvard.edu"
  name: "Anita Nikkanen"
  username: "anikkanen"
+++

<p>Telemakhos appeals to the principle of reciprocity in his address to the Ithacans: his speech shows that feasting, such as the suitors are undertaking at Odysseus’ house, is a matter that calls for reciprocation (when correctly conducted; <em>Od</em>. 2.74-78). Conversely, an evil turn should likewise be reciprocated by an evil turn, another aspect of reciprocity that Telemakhos’ words make clear, and which their chiastic arrangement further underscores (δυσμενέων κάκ’ ἔρεξεν … κακὰ ῥέζετε δυσμενέοντες ‘[if Odysseus,] bearing ill-will, did evil deeds … you are doing evil deeds, bearing ill-will,’ <em>Od</em>. 2.72-73). The Ithacans’ not stopping the suitors would in Telemakhos’ words be explicable as a return for an earlier bad turn by Odysseus, but if that is not the case, they deserve as punishment the <em>mēnis</em> of gods (<em>Od</em>. 2.66-67).</p><p>As for what <em>mēnis</em> is, let us take a step back and look at some elements in Telemakhos’s speech: he describes the wrongs of the suitors (<em>Od</em>. 2.63-64), presents a principle for the maintenance of the proper state of affairs – <em>mēnis </em>of gods as the punishment for the outrageous situation in Ithaca (<em>Od</em>. 2.66-67) – and extends the blame from the culprits proper to their solidarity group (<em>Od</em>. 2.64-66). As Muellner argues with regards to Telemakhos’ speech, <em>mēnis</em> is a sanction aimed at maintaining the cosmic order and incurring it implies the transgression of fundamental cosmic rules, such as the ones the suitors break in abusing the hospitality of Odysseus’ household. Furthermore, given the role of solidarity in maintaining the continuity of the world order, those in the solidarity group of a transgressor are liable for punishment along with the culprit. Thus the three elements singled out from Telemakhos’ speech conform to the concept of <em>mēnis</em> and its functioning in maintaining social and cosmic order. (Compare the speech of Mentor at <em>Od</em>. 2.229-241, in my note on which I discuss <em>mēnis</em> and memory, which works towards the same end as <em>mēnis</em> but in a symmetrically opposite manner, and the ethical function of the two further. With regard to reciprocity, Mentor, in contrast to what Telemakhos says here, is clear on the point that there has been no earlier bad turn by Odysseus that would justify the current outrage in Ithaca, and so, the people deserve a punishment as a reciprocation for their actions).</p><p>To return to reciprocity: just as <em>mēnis</em> has a moral dimension and a function in upholding the proper social and cosmic order, so, too, is reciprocity involved in morality. Reciprocal exchange is a total social phenomenon in the Maussian sense of the term, such that reciprocal exchange is also an articulation of the social order, of the cosmic hierarchy, and an instance of the working of <em>themis</em> (the rules that enforce cosmic hierarchy and proper social behavior) – it is worth noting here that Telemakhos appeals to Themis in his speech (<em>Od</em>. 2.68). <em>mēnis</em> in fact protects the rules of exchange and the hierarchy of proper cosmic order, and reciprocity and <em>mēnis</em> are thus interconnected. Telemakhos’ speech neatly illustrates this web of interconnected concepts, and his argument relies on understanding their role within the Homeric society.</p><p>See further:</p><p>Mauss, Marcel. 1990. <em>The Gift: The form and reason for exchange in archaic societies</em>. Transl. W. D. Halls. London: Routledge.</p><p>Muellner, Leonard. 1996. <em>The Anger of Achilles: Mênis in Greek Epic</em>. Ithaca; London: Cornell University Press.</p><p>Seaford, Richard. 1994. <em>Reciprocity and Ritual: Homer and Tragedy in the Developing City-State</em>. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press.</p>