+++

tags:
- "Achaean Wall"
- "hero cult"
- "post-heroic age"
- "hēmitheoi ‘demigods; half-gods’"
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Iliad"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Iliad.12.23.rKzcXmv"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:12.23"
title: "Iliad 12.023"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>As the rivers of the Trojan landscape flood away all traces of the Achaean Wall, they also obliterate all traces of the epic battles fought by the Achaean heroes in the mise-en-scène or scenery of that landscape. These heroes are called <em>hēmitheoi</em> ‘demigods, half-gods’ here at I.12.023, and we find no other attestation of this word <em>hēmitheoi</em> in either the <em>Iliad</em> or the <em>Odyssey</em>: in both epics, the word for ‘heroes’ is consistently <em>hērōes</em>. Unlike <em>hēroēs</em>, the word <em>hēmitheoi</em> is appropriate to a style of expression that looks beyond epic. The use of this word to mark the Achaean heroes here belongs not to the epic tradition of the Homeric <em>Iliad</em> and <em>Odyssey</em> but to alternative poetic traditions having to do with cosmogony and anthropogony, as we see when we consider the attestations of <em>hēmitheoi</em> in Hesiodic poetry, F 204.100 and <em>Works and Days</em> 160; relevant too are the attestations of this word in the poetry of the <em>Homeric Hymns</em>, 31.19 and 32.19 (Nagy 2006 §66). In the Hesiodic <em>Works and Days</em>, 160, the word <em>hēmitheoi</em> signals the last generation of heroes, who were obliterated in the time of the Theban and the Trojan Wars, 161–165, but who were preserved after death and immortalized by being transported to the Islands of the Blessed, 167–173. It can be said in general that the theme of heroic immortalization is central to myths and rituals related to hero cult, and so the use of the word <em>hēmitheoi</em> ‘demigods’ in this Hesiodic context is highly significant (<em>The Best of the Achaeans</em> 342-343): yes, all epic heroes must die, but then, by way of becoming cult heroes, they are mystically immortalized after death (Nagy 2006 §§80–108). And the significance of such a theme is further heightened by the idea of divine parentage as built into the meaning of word <em>hēmitheoi</em> as ‘half-gods’, which shows a genetic understanding of the hero. The heroic potential is programmed by divine genes, as it were. There has to be a god involved in any hero’s “family tree.” Still, the literal meaning of the word <em>hēmitheos</em> as ‘half-god’ does not imply an exact half-and-half distribution of immortals and mortals in a hero’s genealogy. Rather, this meaning marks a tenuous balancing of immortality with mortality in the hero’s self. In the case of the hero Achilles, for example, the divinity of his mother is not the only ‘half’ of immortality that he inherits, since his mortal father Peleus is descended, by way of that man’s own mortal father Aiakos, from the immortal father Zeus himself. But the bitter fact remains that Peleus is a mortal. And, since Peleus as one of the two parents of Achilles is mortal, Achilles must be mortal as well, even though his other parent is Thetis, who is not only immortal but even endowed with limitless cosmic powers (<em>The Best of the Achaeans</em> 346–347). So Achilles, despite the limitless potential he inherits from Thetis, is subject to death. The same can be said about all other Homeric heroes: even though they are all descended in some way or another from the gods, they are all mortals. They all have to die, like ordinary mortals. No matter how many immortals you find in a heroic “family tree,” the intrusion of even a single mortal will make all successive descendants mortal. Mortality, not immortality, is the dominant gene (GN 2006 §70). So, the meaning of <em>hēmitheoi</em> as ‘half-gods’ can cut both ways: the ‘half-divinity’ of the hero can point downward to the grim facts of mortality just as it can point upward to the sublime hopes for immortalization after death. The scenario of obliteration followed by immortalization for the <em>hēmitheoi</em> in Hesiodic poetry, <em>Works and Days</em> 161–173, must be contrasted with the scenario of obliteration followed by no mention of immortalization for the <em>hēmitheoi</em> in Homeric poetry, I.12.17–33. The inevitability of death for the hero enhances the pathos of hoping for immortalization after death. Such a pathos is visible in the exceptional Homeric occurrence of <em>hēmitheoi</em> at I.12.023, where we see a correspondingly exceptional shift in the Homeric narrative perspective: instead of viewing heroes through the lens of the heroic age, seeing them as they were back then, alive and hoping to be remembered, the poetry now views them through the lens of a post-heroic age, seeing them as already dead and hopefully immortalized after death (Nagy 2006 §67).</p>