+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus tore off his rags, and sprang on to
    the broad pavement with his bow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the
    arrows on to the ground at his feet and said, "The mighty contest [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] is at an end. I will now see whether Apollo
    will grant it to me to hit another mark which no man has yet hit."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="8" unit="line"/>On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinoos, who
    was about to take up a two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had
    it in his hands. He had no thought of death - who amongst all the revelers
    would think that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and
    kill him? The arrow struck Antinoos in the throat, and the point went clean
    through his neck, so that he fell over and the cup dropped from his hand, while
    a thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils. He kicked the table from him
    and upset the things on it, so that the bread and roasted meats were all soiled
    as they fell over on to the ground. The suitors were in an uproar when they saw
    that a man had been hit; they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their
    seats and looked everywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor
    spear, and they rebuked Odysseus very angrily. "Stranger," said they, "you
    shall pay for shooting people in this way: you shall see no other contest
    [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>]; you are a doomed man; he whom you have
    slain was the foremost youth in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, and the vultures shall devour you for having killed
    him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="31" unit="line"/>Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had
    killed Antinoos by mistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over
    the head of every one of them. But Odysseus glared at them and said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="35" unit="line"/>"Dogs, did you think that I should not come back
    from the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of the Trojans? You have wasted my
    substance, have forced my women servants to lie with you, and have wooed my
    wife while I was still living. You have feared neither the gods nor that there
    would be future <term xml:lang="grc">nemesis</term> from men, and now you shall
    die."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="42" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="42" unit="line"/>They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and
    every man looked round about to see whither he might flee for safety, but
    Eurymakhos alone spoke.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="44" unit="line"/>"If you are Odysseus," said he, "then what you
    have said is just. We have done much wrong on your lands and in your house. But
    Antinoos, who was the head and front of the offending [<term xml:lang="grc">aitios</term>], lies low already. It was all his doing. It was not that he
    wanted to marry Penelope; he did not so much care about that; what he wanted
    was something quite different, and Zeus has not granted it to him; he wanted to
    kill your son and to be chief man in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>. Now, therefore, that he has met the death which was his
    due, spare the lives of your people. We will make everything good among
    ourselves in this district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>], and pay you in
    full for all that we have eaten and drunk. Each one of us shall pay you a fine
    worth twenty oxen, and we will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your
    heart is softened. Until we have done this no one can complain of your being
    enraged against us."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="60" unit="line"/>Odysseus again glared at him and said, "Though
    you should give me all that you have in the world both now and all that you
    ever shall have, I will not stay my hand till I have paid all of you in full.
    You must fight, or flee for your lives; and flee, not a man of you shall."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="68" unit="line"/>Their hearts sank as they heard him, but
    Eurymakhos again spoke saying:</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="70" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="70" unit="line"/>"My friends, this man will give us no quarter.
    He will stand where he is and shoot us down till he has killed every man among
    us. Let us then show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield
    you from his arrows. Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him from the
    pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raise such an
    alarm as shall soon stay his shooting."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="79" unit="line"/>As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze,
    sharpened on both sides, and with a loud cry sprang towards Odysseus, but
    Odysseus instantly shot an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple
    and fixed itself in his liver. He dropped his sword and fell doubled up over
    his table. The cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as he smote the
    earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and he kicked the stool with
    his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="89" unit="line"/>Then Amphinomos drew his sword and made straight
    at Odysseus to try and get him away from the door; but Telemakhos was too quick
    for him, and struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders
    and went right through his chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground and
    struck the earth with his forehead. Then Telemakhos sprang away from him,
    leaving his spear still in the body, for he feared that if he stayed to draw it
    out, some one of the Achaeans might come up and hack at him with his sword, or
    knock him down, so he set off at a run, and immediately was at his father's
    side. Then he said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="101" unit="line"/>"Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears,
    and a brass helmet for your temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring
    other armor for the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be
    armed."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="105" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="105" unit="line"/>"Run and fetch them," answered Odysseus, "while
    my arrows hold out, or when I am alone they may get me away from the door."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="108" unit="line"/>Telemakhos did as his father said, and went off
    to the store room where the armor was kept. He chose four shields, eight
    spears, and four brass helmets with horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all
    speed to his father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and the
    swineherd also put on their armor, and took their places near Odysseus.
    Meanwhile Odysseus, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting the suitors
    one by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrows gave out, he
    set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house by the door post, and
    hung a shield four hides thick about his shoulders; on his comely head he set
    his helmet, well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
    above it, and he grasped two redoubtable bronze-shod spears.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="126" unit="line"/>Now there was a trap door on the wall, while at
    one end of the pavement there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this
    exit was closed by a well-made door. Odysseus told Philoitios to stand by this
    door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a time. But Agelaos
    shouted out, "Cannot some one go up to the trap door and tell the people what
    is going on? Help would come at once, and we should soon make an end of this
    man and his shooting."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="135" unit="line"/>"This may not be, Agelaos," answered
    Melanthios, "the mouth of the narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance
    to the outer court. One brave man could prevent any number from getting in. But
    I know what I will do, I will bring you arms from the store room, for I am sure
    it is there that Odysseus and his son have put them."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="142" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="142" unit="line"/>On this the goatherd Melanthios went by back
    passages to the store room of Odysseus, house. There he chose twelve shields,
    with as many helmets and spears, and brought them back as fast as he could to
    give them to the suitors. Odysseus’ heart began to fail him when he saw the
    suitors putting on their armor and brandishing their spears. He saw the
    greatness of the danger, and said to Telemakhos, "Some one of the women inside
    is helping the suitors against us, or it may be Melanthios."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="153" unit="line"/>Telemakhos answered, "The fault [<term xml:lang="grc">aitios</term>], father, is mine, and mine only; I left the
    store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than I have. Go,
    Eumaios, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the women who is doing
    this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthios the son of Dolios."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="160" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthios
    was again going to the store room to fetch more armor, but the swineherd saw
    him and said to Odysseus who was beside him, "Odysseus, noble son of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, it is that scoundrel Melanthios,
    just as we suspected, who is going to the store room. Say, shall I kill him, if
    I can get the better of him, or shall I bring him here that you may take your
    own revenge for all the many wrongs that he has done in your house?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="170" unit="line"/>Odysseus answered, "Telemakhos and I will hold
    these suitors in check, no matter what they do; go back both of you and bind
    Melanthios’ hands and feet behind him. Throw him into the store room and make
    the door fast behind you; then fasten a noose about his body, and string him
    close up to the rafters from a high bearing-post, that he may linger on in an
    agony."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="178" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="178" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had
    said; they went to the store room, which they entered before Melanthios saw
    them, for he was busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so
    the two took their stand on either side of the door and waited. By and by
    Melanthios came out with a helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rotted shield in
    the other, which had been borne by <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName> when he was young, but which had been long since thrown
    aside, and the straps had become unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged
    him back by the hair, and threw him struggling to the ground. They bent his
    hands and feet well behind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond
    as Odysseus had told them; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung
    him up from a high pillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over him did
    you then vaunt, O swineherd Eumaios, saying, "Melanthios, you will pass the
    night on a soft bed as you deserve. You will know very well when morning comes
    from the streams of Okeanos, and it is time for you to be driving in your goats
    for the suitors to feast on."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="200" unit="line"/>There, then, they left him in very cruel
    bondage, and having put on their armor they closed the door behind them and
    went back to take their places by the side of Odysseus; whereon the four men
    stood in the room, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the
    body of the court were still both brave and many. Then Zeus’ daughter Athena
    came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of Mentor. Odysseus was glad
    when he saw her and said, "Mentor, lend me your help, and forget not your old
    comrade, nor the many good turns he has done you. Besides, you are my
    age-mate."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="210" unit="line"/>But all the time he felt sure it was Athena,
    and the suitors from the other side raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaos
    was the first to reproach her. "Mentor," he cried, "do not let Odysseus beguile
    you into siding with him and fighting the suitors. This is what will be our
    plan [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>]: when we have killed these people,
    father and son, we will kill you too. You shall pay for it with your head, and
    when we have killed you, we will take all you have, in doors or out, and merge
    it with Odysseus’ property; we will not let your sons live in your house, nor
    your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="224" unit="line"/>This made Athena still more furious, so she
    scolded Odysseus very angrily. "Odysseus," said she, "your strength and prowess
    are no longer what they were when you fought for nine long years among the
    Trojans about the noble lady Helen. You killed many a man in those days, and it
    was through your stratagem that Priam's city was taken. How comes it that you
    are so lamentably less valiant now that you are on your own ground, face to
    face with the suitors in your own house? Come on, my good fellow, stand by my
    side and see how Mentor, son of Alkinoos shall fight your foes and requite your
    kindnesses conferred upon him."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="236" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="236" unit="line"/>But she would not give him full victory as yet,
    for she wished still further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave
    son, so she flew up to one of the rafters in the roof of the room and sat upon
    it in the form of a swallow.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="241" unit="line"/>Meanwhile Agelaos son of Damastor, Eurynomos,
    Amphimedon, Demoptolemos, Peisandros, and Polybos son of Polyktor bore the
    brunt of the fight upon the suitors’ side; of all those who were still fighting
    for their lives [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhai</term>], they were by far the
    most excellent in <term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>, for the others had already
    fallen under the arrows of Odysseus. Agelaos shouted to them and said, "My
    friends, he will soon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away after having
    done nothing for him but brag. They are standing at the doors unsupported. Do
    not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw your spears first, and see if
    you cannot cover yourselves with glory by killing him. When he has fallen we
    need not be uneasy about the others."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="255" unit="line"/>They threw their spears as he bade them, but
    Athena made them all of no effect. One hit the door post; another went against
    the door; the pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had
    avoided all the spears of the suitors Odysseus said to his own men, "My
    friends, I should say we too had better let drive into the middle of them, or
    they will crown all the harm they have done us by killing us outright."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="265" unit="line"/>They therefore aimed straight in front of them
    and threw their spears. Odysseus killed Demoptolemos, Telemakhos Euryades,
    Eumaios Elatus, while the stockman killed Peisandros. These all bit the dust,
    and as the others drew back into a corner Odysseus and his men rushed forward
    and regained their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="272" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="272" unit="line"/>The suitors now aimed a second time, but again
    Athena made their weapons for the most part without effect. One hit a
    bearing-post of the room; another went against the door; while the pointed
    shaft of another struck the wall. Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the
    top skin from off Telemakhos’ wrist, and Ktesippos managed to graze Eumaios’
    shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell to the ground. Then
    Odysseus and his men let drive into the crowd of suitors. Odysseus hit
    Eurydamas, Telemakhos Amphimedon, and Eumaios Polybos. After this the stockman
    hit Ktesippos in the breast, and taunted him saying, "Foul-mouthed son of
    Polytherses, do not be so foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let
    heaven direct your speech, for the gods are far stronger than men. I make you a
    present of this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave Odysseus when
    he was begging about in his own house."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="292" unit="line"/>Thus spoke the stockman, and Odysseus struck
    the son of Damastor with a spear in close fight, while Telemakhos hit
    Leiokritos son of Euenor in the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so
    that he fell forward full on his face upon the ground. Then Athena from her
    seat on the rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors
    quailed. They fled to the other end of the court like a herd of cattle maddened
    by the gadfly in early summer [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>] when the days
    are at their longest. As eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the
    mountains swoop down on the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground,
    and kill them, for they cannot either fight or flee, and lookers on enjoy the
    sport - even so did Odysseus and his men fall upon the suitors and smite them
    on every side. They made a horrible groaning as their brains were being
    battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="310" unit="line"/>Leiodes then caught the knees of Odysseus and
    said, "Odysseus I beseech you have mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged
    any of the women in your house either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the
    others. I saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for
    their folly. I was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall die
    without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got no thanks [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>] for all the good that I did."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="320" unit="line"/>Odysseus looked sternly at him and answered,
    "If you were their sacrificing priest, you must have prayed many a time that it
    might be long before I got home again [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>], and
    that you might marry my wife and have children by her. Therefore you shall
    die."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="326" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="326" unit="line"/>With these words he picked up the sword that
    Agelaos had dropped when he was being killed, and which was lying upon the
    ground. Then he struck Leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell
    rolling in the dust while he was yet speaking.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="330" unit="line"/>The minstrel Phemios son of Terpes - he who had
    been forced by the suitors to sing to them - now tried to save his life. He was
    standing near towards the trap door, and held his lyre in his hand. He did not
    know whether to flee out of the room and sit down by the altar of Zeus that was
    in the outer court, and on which both <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName> and Odysseus had offered up the thigh bones of many an
    ox, or whether to go straight up to Odysseus and embrace his knees, but in the
    end he deemed it best to embrace Odysseus’ knees. So he laid his lyre on the
    ground the ground between the mixing-bowl and the silver-studded seat; then
    going up to Odysseus he caught hold of his knees and said, "Odysseus, I beseech
    you have mercy on me and spare me. You will be sorry [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] for it afterwards if you kill a bard who can sing both for
    gods and men as I can. I make all my lays myself, and heaven visits me with
    every kind of inspiration. I would sing to you as though you were a god, do not
    therefore be in such a hurry to cut my head off. Your own son Telemakhos will
    tell you that I did not want to frequent your house and sing to the suitors
    after their meals, but they were too many and too strong for me, so they made
    me."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="354" unit="line"/>Telemakhos heard him, and at once went up to
    his father. "Hold!" he cried, "the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we
    will spare Medon too, who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless
    Philoitios or Eumaios has already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when
    you were raging about the court."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="361" unit="line"/>Medon caught these words of Telemakhos, for he
    was crouching under a seat beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up
    with a freshly flayed heifer's hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to
    Telemakhos, and laid hold of his knees.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="367" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="367" unit="line"/>"Here I am, my dear sir," said he, "stay your
    hand therefore, and tell your father, or he will kill me in his rage against
    the suitors for having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful
    to yourself."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="371" unit="line"/>Odysseus smiled at him and answered, "Fear not;
    Telemakhos has saved your life, that you may know in future, and tell other
    people, how greatly better good deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore,
    outside the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of the
    slaughter - you and the bard - while I finish my work here inside."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="378" unit="line"/>The pair went into the outer court as fast as
    they could, and sat down by Zeus’ great altar, looking fearfully round, and
    still expecting that they would be killed. Then Odysseus searched the whole
    court carefully over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was
    still living, but he found them all lying in the dust and weltering in their
    blood. They were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of the sea, and
    thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the heat of the sun makes
    an end of them. Even so were the suitors lying all huddled up one against the
    other.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="390" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus said to Telemakhos, "Call nurse
    Eurykleia; I have something to say to her."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="393" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="393" unit="line"/>Telemakhos went and knocked at the door of the
    women's room. "Make haste," said he, "you old woman who have been set over all
    the other women in the house. Come outside; my father wishes to speak to
    you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="398" unit="line"/>When Eurykleia heard this she unfastened the
    door of the women's room and came out, following Telemakhos. She found Odysseus
    among the corpses bespattered with blood and filth like a lion that has just
    been devouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so
    that he is a fearful sight; even so was Odysseus besmirched from head to foot
    with gore. When she saw all the corpses and such a quantity of blood, she was
    beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that a great deed had been done; but
    Odysseus checked her, "Old woman," said he, "rejoice in silence; restrain
    yourself, and do not make any noise about it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt
    over dead men. Heaven's doom and their own evil deeds have brought these men to
    destruction, for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor
    poor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment for
    their wickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me which of the women in the
    house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="419" unit="line"/>"I will tell you the truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêtheia</term>], my son," answered Eurykleia. "There are
    fifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding wool, and
    all kinds of household work. Of these, twelve in all have misbehaved, and have
    been wanting in respect to me, and also to Penelope. They showed no disrespect
    to Telemakhos, for he has only lately grown and his mother never permitted him
    to give orders to the female servants; but let me go upstairs and tell your
    wife all that has happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="430" unit="line"/>"Do not wake her yet," answered Odysseus, "but
    tell the women who have misconducted themselves to come to me."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="431" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="431" unit="line"/>Eurykleia left the room to tell the women, and
    make them come to Odysseus; in the meantime he called Telemakhos, the stockman,
    and the swineherd. "Begin," said he, "to remove the dead, and make the women
    help you. Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables and seats.
    When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take the women into the
    space between the domed room and the wall of the outer court, and run them
    through with your swords till they are quite dead, and have forgotten all about
    love and the way in which they used to lie in secret with the suitors."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="446" unit="line"/>On this the women came down in a body, weeping
    and wailing bitterly. First they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them
    up against one another in the gatehouse. Odysseus ordered them about and made
    them do their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. When they had
    done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges and water, while
    Telemakhos and the two others shoveled up the blood and dirt from the ground,
    and the women carried it all away and put it out of doors. Then when they had
    made the whole place quite clean and orderly, they took the women out and
    hemmed them in the narrow space between the wall of the domed room and that of
    the yard, so that they could not get away: and Telemakhos said to the other
    two, "I shall not let these women die a clean death, for they were insolent to
    me and my mother, and used to sleep with the suitors."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="465" unit="line"/>So saying he made a ship's cable fast to one of
    the bearing-posts that supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all
    around the building, at a good height, lest any of the women's feet should
    touch the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that has been set
    for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their nest, and a terrible
    fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put their heads in nooses one
    after the other and die most miserably. Their feet moved convulsively for a
    while, but not for very long.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="474" unit="line"/>As for Melanthios, they took him through the
    room into the inner court. There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew
    out his vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut
    off his hands and his feet.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:22"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="478" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="478" unit="line"/>When they had done this they washed their hands
    and feet and went back into the house, for all was now over; and Odysseus said
    to the dear old nurse Eurykleia, "Bring me sulfur, which cleanses all
    pollution, and fetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters.
    Go, moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants, and also all
    the maid servants that are in the house."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="485" unit="line"/>"All that you have said is true," answered
    Eurykleia, "but let me bring you some clean clothes - a shirt and cloak. Do not
    keep these rags on your back any longer. It is not right."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="490" unit="line"/>"First light me a fire," replied Odysseus.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="492" unit="line"/>She brought the fire and sulfur, as he had
    bidden her, and Odysseus thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner
    and outer courts. Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had
    happened; whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands,
    and pressed round Odysseus to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders and
    taking hold of his hands. It made him feel as if he should like to weep, for he
    remembered every one of them. <milestone n="501" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

