+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>And Odysseus answered, "King Alkinoos, it is a
    good thing to hear a bard with such a divine voice as this man has. There is
    nothing better or more delightful than when merriment [<term xml:lang="grc">euphrosunê</term>] prevails over a whole <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>,
    with the guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread
    and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every man. This
    is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see. Now, however, since you are
    inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my own sad memories in
    respect of them, I do not know how to begin, nor yet how to continue and
    conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="16" unit="line"/>"Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you
    too may know it, and that one day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, I may
    become a guest-friend to you, though I live so far away from all of you. I am
    Odysseus son of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, renowned
    among humankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> ascends to heaven. I live in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, where there is a high mountain called Neritum, covered
    with forests; and not far from it there is a group of islands very near to one
    another - Dulichium, Same, and the wooded island of <placeName key="tgn,7011374">Zacynthus</placeName>. It lies squat on the horizon, all
    highest up in the sea towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it
    towards dawn. It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my eyes know
    none that they better love to look upon. The goddess Calypso kept me with her
    in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, as did also the cunning Aeaean goddess
    Circe; but they could neither of them persuade me, for there is nothing dearer
    to a man than his own country and his parents, and however splendid a home he
    may have in a foreign country, if it be far from father or mother, he does not
    care about it. Now, however, I will tell you of the many hazardous adventures
    which by Zeus’ will I met with on my return [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] from <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="39" unit="line"/>"When I had set sail thence the wind took me
    first to Ismaros, which is the city of the Kikones. There I sacked the town and
    put the people to the sword. We took their wives and also much booty, which we
    divided equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. I
    then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very foolishly would
    not obey me, so they stayed there drinking much wine and killing great numbers
    of sheep and oxen on the sea shore. Meanwhile the Kikones cried out for help to
    other Kikones who lived inland. These were more in number, and stronger, and
    they were more skilled in the art of war, for they could fight, either from
    chariots or on foot as the occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they
    came as thick as leaves and bloom in summertime [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>], and the hand of heaven was against us, so that we were hard
    pressed. They set the battle in array near the ships, and the hosts aimed their
    bronze-shod spears at one another. So long as the day waxed and it was still
    morning, we held our own against them, though they were more in number than we;
    but as the sun went down, towards the time when men loose their oxen, the
    Kikones got the better of us, and we lost half a dozen men from every ship we
    had; so we got away with those that were left.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="62" unit="line"/>"Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our
    hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did
    we leave till we had thrice invoked each one of the poor men who had perished
    by the hands of the Kikones. Then Zeus raised the North wind against us till it
    blew a blast of wind, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and
    night sprang forth out of the heavens. We let the ships run before the gale,
    but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took them down for
    fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the land. There we lay two
    days and two nights suffering much alike from toil and distress of mind, but on
    the morning of the third day we again raised our masts, set sail, and took our
    places, letting the wind and steersmen direct our ship. I should have got home
    at that time unharmed had not the North wind and the currents been against me
    as I was doubling Cape Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island of
    <placeName key="tgn,7010869">Cythera</placeName>.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="82" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="82" unit="line"/>"I was driven thence by foul winds for a space
    of nine days upon the sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the
    Lotus-eaters, who live on a food that comes from a kind of flower. Here we
    landed to take in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the
    shore near the ships. When they had eaten and drunk I chose [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] two of my company to go see what manner of men
    the people of the place might be, and they had a third man under them. They
    started at once, and went about among the Lotus-eaters, who did them no harm,
    but gave them to eat of the lotus, which was so delicious that those who ate of
    it left off caring about home, and did not even want to go back and say what
    had happened to them, but were for staying and munching lotus with the
    Lotus-eaters without thinking further of their <term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>; nevertheless, though they wept bitterly I forced them back
    to the ships and made them fast under the benches. Then I told the rest to go
    on board at once, lest any of them should taste of the lotus and leave off
    wanting to achieve a homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>], so they
    took their places and smote the gray sea with their oars.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="105" unit="line"/>"We sailed hence, always in much distress, till
    we came to the land of the lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes
    neither plant nor plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat,
    barley, and grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild
    grapes yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. They have no laws
    nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops of high mountains;
    each is lord and master in his family, and they take no account of their
    neighbors.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="116" unit="line"/>"Now off their harbor there lies a wooded and
    fertile island not quite close to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far.
    It is overrun with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are never
    disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen - who as a rule will suffer so much
    hardship in forest or among mountain precipices - do not go there, nor yet
    again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies a wilderness untilled and
    unsown from year to year, and has no living thing upon it but only goats. For
    the Cyclopes have no ships, nor yet shipwrights who could make ships for them;
    they cannot therefore go from city to city, or sail over the sea to one
    another's country as people who have ships can do; if they had had these they
    would have colonized the island, for it is a very good one, and would yield
    everything in due season. There are meadows that in some places come right down
    to the sea shore, well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do
    there excellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would always yield
    heavily at harvest time [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>], for the soil is
    deep. There is a good harbor where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor
    need a ship be moored, but all one has to do is to beach one's vessel and stay
    there till the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again. At the head of
    the harbor there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, and there are
    poplars growing all round it.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="142" unit="line"/>"Here we entered, but so dark was the night
    that some god must have brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be
    seen. A thick mist hung all round our ships; the moon was hidden behind a mass
    of clouds so that no one could have seen the island if he had looked for it,
    nor were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before we found
    ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached the ships, we
    took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach till daybreak.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="152" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="152" unit="line"/>"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
    appeared, we admired the island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs,
    Zeus’ daughters, roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our
    dinner. On this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and
    dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats. Heaven sent us
    excellent sport; I had twelve ships with me, and each ship got nine goats,
    while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day to the going down of
    the sun we ate and drank our fill, - and we had plenty of wine left, for each
    one of us had taken many jars full when we sacked the city of the Kikones, and
    this had not yet run out. While we were feasting we kept turning our eyes
    towards the land of the Cyclopes, which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their
    stubble fires. We could almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of
    their sheep and goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we
    camped down upon the beach, and next morning I called a council.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="172" unit="line"/>"‘Stay here, my brave men,’ said I, ‘all the
    rest of you, while I go with my ship and make trial of these people myself: I
    want to see if they are uncivilized [not <term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>]
    savages, or a race hospitable and endowed with a god-fearing <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="177" unit="line"/>"I went on board, bidding my men to do so also
    and loose the hawsers; so they took their places and smote the gray sea with
    their oars. When we got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of a
    cliff near the sea, we saw a great cave overhung with laurels. It was a station
    for a great many sheep and goats, and outside there was a large yard, with a
    high wall round it made of stones built into the ground and of trees both pine
    and oak. This was the abode of a huge monster who was then away from home
    shepherding his flocks. He would have nothing to do with other people, but led
    the life of an outlaw. He was a horrid creature, not like a human being at all,
    but resembling rather some crag that stands out boldly against the sky on the
    top of a high mountain.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="193" unit="line"/>"I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and
    stay where they were, all but the twelve best [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>] among them, who were to go along with myself. I also took a
    goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me by Maron, Apollo son of
    Euanthes, who was priest of Apollo the patron god of Ismaros, and lived within
    the wooded precincts of the temple. When we were sacking the city we respected
    him, and spared his life, as also his wife and child; so he made me some
    presents of great value - seven talents of fine gold, and a bowl of silver,
    with twelve jars of sweet wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavor.
    Not a man nor maid in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and
    one housekeeper: when he drank it he mixed twenty parts of water to one of
    wine, and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that it was
    impossible to refrain from drinking. I filled a large skin with this wine, and
    took a wallet full of provisions with me, for my mind misgave me that I might
    have to deal with some savage who would be of great strength, and would respect
    neither right [<term xml:lang="grc">dikê</term>] nor law.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="216" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="216" unit="line"/>"We soon reached his cave, but he was out
    shepherding, so we went inside and took stock of all that we could see. His
    cheese-racks were loaded with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his
    pens could hold. They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the
    hoggets, then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones
    all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels, bowls, and
    milk pails into which he milked, were swimming with whey. When they saw all
    this, my men begged me to let them first steal some cheeses, and make off with
    them to the ship; they would then return, drive down the lambs and kids, put
    them on board and sail away with them. It would have been indeed better if we
    had done so but I would not listen to them, for I wanted to see the owner
    himself, in the hope that he might give me a present. When, however, we saw him
    my poor men found him ill to deal with.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="231" unit="line"/>"We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in
    sacrifice, ate others of them, and then sat waiting till the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> should come in with his sheep. When he
    came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood to light the fire for
    his supper, and this he flung with such a noise on to the floor of his cave
    that we hid ourselves for fear at the far end of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove
    all the ewes inside, as well as the she-goats that he was going to milk,
    leaving the males, both rams and he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled
    a huge stone to the mouth of the cave - so huge that two and twenty strong
    four-wheeled wagons would not be enough to draw it from its place against the
    doorway. When he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats, all in
    due course, and then let each of them have her own young. He curdled half the
    milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the other half he poured into
    bowls that he might drink it for his supper. When he had got through with all
    his work, he lit the fire, and then caught sight of us, whereon he said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="252" unit="line"/>"‘Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from?
    Are you traders, or do you sail the sea as rovers, with your hands against
    every man, and every man's hand against you?’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="256" unit="line"/>"We were frightened out of our senses by his
    loud voice and monstrous form, but I managed to say, ‘We are Achaeans on our
    way home from <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, but by the will
    of Zeus, and stress of weather, we have been driven far out of our course. We
    are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who has won infinite <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> throughout the whole world, by sacking so great
    a city and killing so many people. We therefore humbly pray you to show us some
    hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors may reasonably
    expect. May your excellency give reverence [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>]
    to the gods, for we are your suppliants, and Zeus takes all respectable
    travelers under his protection, for he is the avenger of all suppliants and
    foreigners in distress.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="272" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="272" unit="line"/>"To this he gave me but a pitiless answer,
    ‘Stranger,’ said he, ‘you are a fool, or else you know nothing of this country.
    Talk to me, indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes
    do not care about Zeus or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so much
    stronger than they. I shall not spare either yourself or your companions out of
    any regard for Zeus, unless I am in the humor for doing so. And now tell me
    where you made your ship fast when you came on shore. Was it round the point,
    or is she lying straight off the land?’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="281" unit="line"/>"He said this to draw me out, but I was too
    cunning to be caught in that way, so I answered with a lie; ‘Poseidon,’ said I,
    ‘sent my ship on to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it.
    We were driven on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with me
    escaped the jaws of death.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="287" unit="line"/>"The cruel wretch granted me not one word of
    answer, but with a sudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed
    them down upon the ground as though they had been puppies. Their brains were
    shed upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. Then he tore them
    limb from limb and supped upon them. He gobbled them up like a lion in the
    wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without leaving anything
    uneaten. As for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to heaven on seeing such a
    horrid sight, for we did not know what else to do; but when the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> had filled his huge paunch, and had
    washed down his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretched
    himself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep. I was
    at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into his vitals, but
    I reflected that if I did we should all certainly be lost, for we should never
    be able to shift the stone which the monster had put in front of the door. So
    we stayed sobbing and sighing where we were till morning came.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="307" unit="line"/>"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
    appeared, he again lit his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly,
    and then let each have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with
    all his work, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his
    morning's meal. Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone away from
    the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once put it back again - as easily
    as though he were merely clapping the lid on to a quiver full of arrows. As
    soon as he had done so he shouted, and cried ‘Shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep to
    drive them on to the mountain; so I was left to scheme some way of taking my
    revenge and covering myself with glory.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="318" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="318" unit="line"/>"In the end I deemed it would be the best plan
    to do as follows. The <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> had a
    great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it was of green olive
    wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for a staff as soon as it should be
    dry. It was so huge that we could only compare it to the mast of a twenty-oared
    merchant vessel of large burden, and able to venture out into open sea. I went
    up to this club and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the
    men and told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do,
    and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in the fire to make
    it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which was lying about all
    over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of them should venture along
    with myself to lift it and bore it into the monster's eye while he was asleep.
    The lot fell upon the very four whom I should have chosen, and I myself made
    five. In the evening the wretch came back from shepherding, and drove his
    flocks into the cave - this time driving them all inside, and not leaving any
    in the yards; I suppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god must have
    prompted him to do so. As soon as he had put the stone back to its place
    against the door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly,
    and then let each have her own young one; when he had got through with all this
    work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off them. So I went
    up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my hands:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="347" unit="line"/>"‘Look here, <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName>,’ said I, 'you have been eating a great deal of man's
    flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what kind of liquor
    we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as a drink-offering, in the
    hope that you would take compassion upon me and further me on my way home,
    whereas all you do is to go on ramping and raving most intolerably. You ought
    to be ashamed yourself; how can you expect people to come see you any more if
    you treat them in this way?’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="353" unit="line"/>"He then took the cup and drank. He was so
    delighted with the taste of the wine that he begged me for another bowl full.
    ‘Be so kind,’ he said, ‘as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once.
    I want to make you a present that you will be glad to have. We have wine even
    in this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but this
    drinks like nectar and ambrosia all in one.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="360" unit="line"/>"I then gave him some more; three times did I
    fill the bowl for him, and three times did he drain it without thought or heed;
    then, when I saw that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as
    plausibly as I could: ‘<placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName>, you
    ask my name and I will tell it you; give me, therefore, the present you
    promised me; my name is Noman; this is what my father and mother and my friends
    have always called me.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="368" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="368" unit="line"/>"But the cruel wretch said, ‘Then I will eat
    all Noman's comrades before Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last.
    This is the present that I will make him.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="371" unit="line"/>As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face
    upwards on the ground. His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep
    took hold upon him. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the
    gobbets of human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk.
    Then I thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and encouraged
    my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When the wood, green though
    it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of the fire glowing with heat, and my
    men gathered round me, for a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> had filled
    their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the beam into the
    monster's eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I kept turning it round
    and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship's plank with an auger, which
    two men with a wheel and strap can keep on turning as long as they choose. Even
    thus did we bore the red hot beam into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled
    all over it as we worked it round and round, so that the steam from the burning
    eyeball scalded his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in
    the fire. As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to temper
    it - for it is this that gives strength to the iron - and it makes a great hiss
    as he does so, even thus did the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName>’ eye hiss round the beam of olive wood, and his hideous
    yells made the cave ring again. We ran away in a fright, but he plucked the
    beam all besmirched with gore from his eye, and hurled it from him in a frenzy
    of rage and pain, shouting as he did so to the other Cyclopes who lived on the
    bleak headlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round his cave
    when they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="403" unit="line"/>"‘What ails you, Polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that
    you make such a noise, breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us
    from being able to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no
    man is trying to kill you either by fraud or by force [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>]?</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="407" unit="line"/>"But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the
    cave, ‘Noman is killing me by fraud! Noman is killing me by force [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>]!’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="409" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="409" unit="line"/>"‘Then,’ said they, ‘if no man is attacking
    you, you must be ill; when Zeus makes people ill, there is no help for it, and
    you had better pray to your father Poseidon.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="413" unit="line"/>"Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at
    the success of my clever stratagem, but the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName>, groaning and in an agony of pain, felt about with his
    hands till he found the stone and took it from the door; then he sat in the
    doorway and stretched his hands in front of it to catch anyone going out with
    the sheep, for he thought I might be foolish enough to attempt this.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="420" unit="line"/>"As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how
    I could best save my own life [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] and those of
    my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who knows that his life depends
    upon it, for the danger was very great. In the end I deemed that this plan
    would be the best. The male sheep were well grown, and carried a heavy black
    fleece, so I bound them noiselessly in threes together, with some of the
    withies on which the wicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a man under
    the middle sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that there
    were three sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram finer than any of
    the others, so I caught hold of him by the back, ensconced myself in the thick
    wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece, face upwards,
    keeping a firm hold on it all the time.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="436" unit="line"/>"Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind
    till morning came, but when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared,
    the male sheep hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the
    pens waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their
    master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they stood
    upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were underneath
    their bellies. As the ram was going out, last of all, heavy with its fleece and
    with the weight of my crafty self; Polyphemus laid hold of it and said:</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="447" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="447" unit="line"/>"‘My good ram, what is it that makes you the
    last to leave my cave this morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before
    you, but lead the mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain,
    and are the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Is
    it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because that
    wicked Noman and his horrid crew have got him down in his drink and blinded
    him? But I will have his life yet. If you could understand and talk, you would
    tell me where the wretch is hiding, and I would dash his brains upon the ground
    till they flew all over the cave. I should thus have some satisfaction for the
    harm this no-good Noman has done me.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="461" unit="line"/>"As spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we
    were a little way out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram's
    belly, and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by
    constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them down to
    the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who had escaped
    death, but wept for the others whom the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> had killed. However, I made signs to them by nodding
    and frowning that they were to hush their crying, and told them to get all the
    sheep on board at once and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their
    places, and smote the gray sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far out
    as my voice would reach, I began to jeer at the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName>.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="475" unit="line"/>"‘<placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName>,’ said I, ‘you should have taken better measure of your
    man before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, do you intend by
    violence [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] to eat up your visitors in your own
    cave? You might have known that your derangement would find you out, and now
    Zeus and the other gods have punished you.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="480" unit="line"/>"He got more and more furious as he heard me,
    so he tore the top from off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my
    ship so that it was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea
    quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us
    back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. But I snatched up a
    long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my men by nodding my head,
    that they must row for their lives, whereon they laid out with a will. When we
    had got twice as far as we were before, I was for jeering at the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> again, but the men begged and prayed
    of me to hold my tongue.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="494" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="494" unit="line"/>"‘Do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to
    provoke this savage creature further; he has thrown one rock at us already
    which drove us back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the
    death of us; if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would have
    pounded our heads and our ship's timbers into a jelly with the rugged rocks he
    would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="500" unit="line"/>"But I would not listen to them, and shouted
    out to him in my rage, ‘<placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName>, if
    any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and spoiled your beauty, say
    it was the valiant warrior Odysseus, son of Laertes, who lives in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="506" unit="line"/>"On this he groaned, and cried out, ‘Alas,
    alas, then the old prophecy about me is coming true. There was a seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>] here, at one time, a man both brave and of
    great stature, Telemos son of Eurymos, who was an excellent seer, and did all
    the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he grew old; he told me that all this
    would happen to me some day, and said I should lose my sight by the hand of
    Odysseus. I have been all along expecting some one of imposing presence and
    superhuman strength, whereas he turns out to be a little insignificant
    weakling, who has managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my
    drink; come here, then, Odysseus, that I may make you presents to show my
    hospitality, and urge Poseidon to help you forward on your journey - for
    Poseidon and I are father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me, which no
    one else neither god nor man can do.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="522" unit="line"/>"Then I said, ‘I wish I could be as sure of
    killing you outright and sending you down, bereft of your <term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>, to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more than
    Poseidon to cure that eye of yours.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="526" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="526" unit="line"/>"On this he lifted up his hands to the
    firmament of heaven and prayed, saying, ‘Hear me, great Poseidon; if I am
    indeed your own true-begotten son, grant that Odysseus may never reach his home
    alive; or if he must get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in
    sore plight after losing all his men let him reach his home in another man's
    ship and find trouble in his house.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="536" unit="line"/>"Thus did he pray, and Poseidon heard his
    prayer. Then he picked up a rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and
    hurled it with prodigious force. It fell just short of the ship, but was within
    a little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rock fell into
    it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on our way towards the
    shore of the island.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="543" unit="line"/>"When at last we got to the island where we had
    left the rest of our ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously
    awaiting our return. We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to
    the sea shore; we also landed the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName>’ sheep, and divided them equitably amongst us so that
    none might have reason to complain. As for the ram, my companions agreed that I
    should have it as an extra share; so I sacrificed it on the sea shore, and
    burned its thigh bones to Zeus, who is the lord of all. But he heeded not my
    sacrifice, and only thought how he might destroy my ships and my comrades.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="556" unit="line"/>"Thus through the livelong day to the going
    down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went
    down and it came on dark, we camped upon the beach. When the child of morning,
    rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers.
    Then they took their places and smote the gray sea with their oars; so we
    sailed on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we
    had lost our comrades. <milestone n="566" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

