+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where
    lives Aeolus son of Hippotas, dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that
    floats (as it were) upon the sea, iron bound with a wall that girds it. Now,
    Aeolus has six daughters and six sons in the bloom of youth, so he made the
    sons marry the daughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother,
    feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. All day long the
    atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savor of roasting meats till it
    groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their well-made
    bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. These were the people
    among whom we had now come.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="14" unit="line"/>"Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking
    me questions all the time about <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>,
    the <placeName key="tgn,5001993">Argive</placeName> fleet, and the return
    [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] of the Achaeans. I told him exactly how
    everything had happened, and when I said I must go, and asked him to further me
    on my way, he made no sort of difficulty, but set about doing so at once.
    Moreover, he flayed me a prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds,
    which he shut up in the hide as in a sack - for Zeus had made him captain over
    the winds, and he could stir or still each one of them according to his own
    pleasure. He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly with a
    silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow from any
    quarter. The West wind which was fair for us did he alone let blow as it chose;
    but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through our own folly.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="28" unit="line"/>"Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on
    the tenth day our native land showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we
    could see the stubble fires burning, and I, being then dead tired, fell into a
    light sleep, for I had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we might
    get home the faster. On this the men fell to talking among themselves, and said
    I was bringing back gold and silver in the sack that Aeolus had given me.
    ‘Bless my heart,’ would one turn to his neighbor, saying, ‘how this man gets
    honored and makes friends in whatever city or country he may go. See what fine
    prizes he is taking home from <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>,
    while we, who have traveled just as far as he has, come back with hands as
    empty as we set out with - and now Aeolus has given him ever so much more.
    Quick - let us see what it all is, and how much gold and silver there is in the
    sack he gave him.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="46" unit="line"/>"Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed.
    They loosed the sack, whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm
    that carried us weeping out to sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke,
    and knew not whether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and make the
    best of it; but I bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the ship, while
    the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our fleet back to the
    Aeolian island.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="56" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="56" unit="line"/>"When we reached it we went ashore to take in
    water, and dined hard by the ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald
    and one of my men and went straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him
    feasting with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on the
    threshold. They were astounded when they saw us and said, ‘Odysseus, what
    brings you here? What <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> has been ill-treating
    you? We took great pains to further you on your way home to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, or wherever it was that you wanted to
    go to.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="67" unit="line"/>"Thus did they speak, but I answered
    sorrowfully, ‘My men have undone me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My
    friends, mend me this mischief, for you can if you will.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="70" unit="line"/>"I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said
    nothing, till their father answered, ‘Vilest of humankind, get you gone at once
    out of the island; him whom heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for
    you come here as one abhorred of heaven.' And with these words he sent me
    sorrowing from his door.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="77" unit="line"/>"Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were
    worn out with long and fruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to
    help them. Six days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we
    reached the rocky stronghold of <placeName key="perseus,Lamos">Lamos</placeName> - Telepylos, the city of the Laestrygonians, where the
    shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked] salutes him who
    is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last answers the salute. In that
    country a man who could do without sleep might earn double wages, one as a
    herdsman of cattle, and another as a shepherd, for they work much the same by
    night as they do by day.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="87" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="87" unit="line"/>"When we reached the harbor we found it
    land-locked under steep cliffs, with a narrow entrance between two headlands.
    My captains took all their ships inside, and made them fast close to one
    another, for there was never so much as a breath of wind inside, but it was
    always dead calm. I kept my own ship outside, and moored it to a rock at the
    very end of the point; then I climbed a high rock to reconnoiter, but could see
    no sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising from the ground. So I
    sent two of my company with an attendant to find out what sort of people the
    inhabitants were.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="103" unit="line"/>"The men when they got on shore followed a
    level road by which the people draw their firewood from the mountains into the
    town, till presently they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch
    water, and who was daughter to a Laestrygonian named Antiphates. She was going
    to the fountain Artacia from which the people bring in their water, and when my
    men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king of that country might
    be, and over what kind of people he ruled; so she directed them to her father's
    house, but when they got there they found his wife to be a giantess as huge as
    a mountain, and they were horrified at the sight of her.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="114" unit="line"/>"She at once called her husband Antiphates from
    the place of assembly, and forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched
    up one of them, and began to make his dinner of him then and there, whereon the
    other two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphates
    raised a hue and cry after them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians sprang
    up from every quarter - ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks at us from the
    cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and I heard the horrid sound of the
    ships crunching up against one another, and the death cries of my men, as the
    Laestrygonians speared them like fishes and took them home to eat them. While
    they were thus killing my men within the harbor I drew my sword, cut the cable
    of my own ship, and told my men to row with all their might if they too would
    not fare like the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful
    enough when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at us.
    As for the others there was not one of them left.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="133" unit="line"/>"Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have
    escaped death, though we had lost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island,
    where Circe lives, a great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the
    magician Aietes - for they are both children of the sun by Perse, who is
    daughter to Okeanos. We brought our ship into a safe harbor without a word, for
    some god guided us there, and having landed we stayed there for two days and
    two nights, worn out in body and mind. When the morning of the third day came I
    took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship to reconnoiter, and see
    if I could discover signs of human handiwork, or hear the sound of voices.
    Climbing to the top of a high look-out I espied the smoke of Circe's house
    rising upwards amid a dense forest of trees, and when I saw this I doubted
    whether, having seen the smoke, I would not go on at once and find out more,
    but in the end I deemed it best to go back to the ship, give the men their
    dinners, and send some of them instead of going myself.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="156" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="156" unit="line"/>"When I had nearly got back to the ship some
    god took pity upon my solitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the
    middle of my path. He was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the
    river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck him in the
    middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went clean through him, and
    he lay groaning in the dust until the life went out of him. Then I set my foot
    upon him, drew my spear from the wound, and laid it down; I also gathered rough
    grass and rushes and twisted them into a fathom or so of good stout rope, with
    which I bound the four feet of the noble creature together; having so done I
    hung him round my neck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for
    the stag was much too big for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder,
    steadying him with one hand. As I threw him down in front of the ship, I called
    the men and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them. ‘Look here my
    friends,’ said I, ‘we are not going to die so much before our time after all,
    and at any rate we will not starve so long as we have got something to eat and
    drink on board.’ On this they uncovered their heads upon the sea shore and
    admired the stag, for he was indeed a splendid man. Then, when they had feasted
    their eyes upon him sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him
    for dinner.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="183" unit="line"/>"Thus through the livelong day to the going
    down of the sun we stayed there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun
    went down and it came on dark, we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of
    morning, fingered Dawn, appeared, I called a council and said, ‘My friends, we
    are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have no idea where
    the sun either sets or rises, so that we do not even know East from West. I see
    no way out of it; nevertheless, we must try and find one. We are certainly on
    an island, for I went as high as I could this morning, and saw the sea reaching
    all round it to the horizon; it lies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke
    rising from out of a thick forest of trees.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="198" unit="line"/>"Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they
    remembered how they had been treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by
    the savage ogre Polyphemus. They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was
    nothing to be got by crying, so I divided them into two companies and set a
    leader over each; I gave one company to Eurylokhos, while I took command of the
    other myself. Then we cast lots in a helmet, and the lot fell upon Eurylokhos;
    so he set out with his twenty-two men, and they wept, as also did we who were
    left behind.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="210" unit="line"/>"When they reached Circe's house they found it
    built of cut stones, on a site that could be seen from far, in the middle of
    the forest. There were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it -
    poor bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged
    into subjection. They did not attack my men, but wagged their great tails,
    fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against them. As hounds crowd
    round their master when they see him coming from dinner - for they know he will
    bring them something - even so did these wolves and lions with their great
    claws fawn upon my men, but the men were terribly frightened at seeing such
    strange creatures. Presently they reached the gates of the goddess’ house, and
    as they stood there they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully as
    she worked at her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such dazzling
    colors as no one but a goddess could weave. On this Polites, whom I valued and
    trusted more than any other of my men, said, ‘There is some one inside working
    at a loom and singing most beautifully; the whole place resounds with it, let
    us call her and see whether she is woman or goddess.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="229" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="229" unit="line"/>"They called her and she came down, unfastened
    the door, and bade them enter. They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except
    Eurylokhos, who suspected mischief and stayed outside. When she had got them
    into her house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a drink with
    cheese, honey, meal, and Pramnian wine but she drugged it with wicked poisons
    to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she turned them into
    pigs by a stroke of her wand, and shut them up in her pigsties. They were like
    pigs- head, hair, and all, and they grunted just as pigs do; but their senses
    [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] were the same as before, and they
    remembered everything.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="241" unit="line"/>"Thus then were they shut up squealing, and
    Circe threw them some acorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylokhos
    hurried back to tell me about the sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome
    with dismay that though he tried to speak he could find no words to do so; his
    eyes filled with tears and he could only sob and sigh, till at last we forced
    his story out of him, and he told us what had happened to the others.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="251" unit="line"/>"‘We went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through
    the forest, and in the middle of it there was a fine house built with cut
    stones in a place that could be seen from far. There we found a woman, or else
    she was a goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted
    to her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and
    invited us in. The others did not suspect any mischief so they followed her
    into the house, but I stayed where I was, for I thought there might be some
    treachery. From that moment I saw them no more, for not one of them ever came
    out, though I sat a long time watching for them.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="261" unit="line"/>"Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it
    over my shoulders; I also took my bow, and told Eurylokhos to come back with me
    and show me the way. But he laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke
    piteously, saying, ‘Sir, do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here,
    for I know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even return alive
    yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate with the few that
    are left us, for we may still save our lives.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="270" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="270" unit="line"/>"‘Stay where you are, then,’ answered I,
    ‘eating and drinking at the ship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound
    to do so.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="274" unit="line"/>"With this I left the ship and went up inland.
    When I got through the charmed grove, and was near the great house of the
    enchantress Circe, I met Hermes with his golden wand, disguised as a young man
    in the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his face.
    He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying, ‘My poor unhappy man,
    whither are you going over this mountain top, alone and without knowing the
    way? Your men are shut up in Circe's pigsties, like so many wild boars in their
    lairs. You surely do not fancy that you can set them free? I can tell you that
    you will never get back and will have to stay there with the rest of them. But
    never mind, I will protect you and get you out of your difficulty. Take this
    herb, which is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to
    Circe's house, it will be a talisman to you against every kind of mischief.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="289" unit="line"/>"‘And I will tell you of all the wicked
    witchcraft that Circe will try to practice upon you. She will mix a potion for
    you to drink, and she will drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will
    not be able to charm you, for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you will
    prevent her spells from working. I will tell you all about it. When Circe
    strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her as though you
    were goings to kill her. She will then be frightened and will desire you to go
    to bed with her; on this you must not point blank refuse her, for you want her
    to set your companions free, and to take good care also of yourself, but you
    make her swear solemnly by all the blessed that she will plot no further
    mischief against you, or else when she has got you naked she will unman you and
    make you fit for nothing.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="302" unit="line"/>"As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the
    ground an showed me what it was like. The root was black, while the flower was
    as white as milk; the gods call it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but
    the gods can do whatever they like.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="307" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="307" unit="line"/>"Then Hermes went back to high <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> passing over the wooded island; but I
    fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded with care as I
    walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there and called the goddess, and
    as soon as she heard me she came down, opened the door, and asked me to come
    in; so I followed her - much troubled in my mind. She set me on a richly
    decorated seat inlaid with silver, there was a footstool also under my feet,
    and she mixed a mess in a golden goblet for me to drink; but she drugged it,
    for she meant me mischief. When she had given it me, and I had drunk it without
    its charming me, she struck me with her wand. ‘There now,’ she cried, ‘be off
    to the pigsty, and make your lair with the rest of them.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="321" unit="line"/>"But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as
    though I would kill her, whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees,
    and spoke piteously, saying, ‘Who and whence are you? From what place and
    people have you come? How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you?
    Never yet was any man able to stand so much as a taste of the herb I gave you;
    you must have some sort of spell-proof <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>; surely
    you can be none other than the bold hero Odysseus, who Hermes always said would
    come here some day with his ship while on his way home from <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>; so be it then; sheathe your sword and
    let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn to trust each other.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="336" unit="line"/>"And I answered, ‘Circe, how can you expect me
    to be friendly with you when you have just been turning all my men into pigs?
    And now that you have got me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me
    to go to bed with you, and will unman me and make me fit for nothing. I shall
    certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first take your
    solemn oath to plot no further harm against me.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="345" unit="line"/>"So she swore at once as I had told her, and
    when she had completed her oath then I went to bed with her.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="348" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="348" unit="line"/>"Meanwhile her four servants, who are her
    housemaids, set about their work. They are the children of the groves and
    fountains, and of the holy waters that run down into the sea. One of them
    spread a fair purple cloth over a seat, and laid a carpet underneath it.
    Another brought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets of
    gold. A third mixed some sweet wine with water in a silver bowl and put golden
    cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in water and set it to boil in a
    large cauldron over a good fire which she had lighted. When the water in the
    cauldron was boiling, she poured cold into it till it was just as I liked it,
    and then she set me in a bath and began washing me from the cauldron about the
    head and shoulders, to take the tire and stiffness out of my limbs. As soon as
    she had done washing me and anointing me with oil, she arrayed me in a good
    cloak and shirt and led me to a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there
    was a footstool also under my feet. A maid servant then brought me water in a
    beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for me to wash my
    hands, and she drew a clean table beside me; an upper servant brought me bread
    and offered me many things of what there was in the house, and then Circe bade
    me eat, but I would not, and sat without heeding what was before me, still
    moody and suspicious.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="375" unit="line"/>"When Circe saw me sitting there without
    eating, and in great grief [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>], she came to
    me and said, ‘Odysseus, why do you sit like that as though you were dumb,
    gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and drink? Is it that you are
    still suspicious? You ought not to be, for I have already sworn solemnly that I
    will not hurt you.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="382" unit="line"/>"And I said, ‘Circe, no man with any sense of
    what is right can think of either eating or drinking in your house until you
    have set his friends free and let him see them. If you want me to eat and
    drink, you must free my men and bring them to me that I may see them with my
    own eyes.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="388" unit="line"/>"When I had said this she went straight through
    the court with her wand in her hand and opened the pigsty doors. My men came
    out like so many prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among
    them and anointed each with a second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad
    drug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger than they were
    before, and much taller and better looking. They knew me at once, seized me
    each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till the whole house was filled with
    the sound of their wailing, and Circe herself was so sorry for them that she
    came up to me and said, ‘Odysseus, noble son of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, go back at once to the sea where
    you have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide all your
    ship's gear and property in some cave, and come back here with your men.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="406" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="406" unit="line"/>"I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea
    shore, and found the men at the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When
    they saw me the silly blubbering men began frisking round me as calves break
    out and gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to be milked
    after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resounds with their
    lowing. They seemed as glad to see me as though they had got back to their own
    rugged <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, where they had been
    born and bred. ‘Sir,’ said the affectionate creatures, ‘we are as glad to see
    you back as though we had got safe home to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>; but tell us all about the fate of our comrades.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="422" unit="line"/>"I spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘We
    must draw our ship on to the land, and hide the ship's gear with all our
    property in some cave; then come with me all of you as fast as you can to
    Circe's house, where you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the
    midst of great abundance.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="428" unit="line"/>"On this the men would have come with me at
    once, but Eurylokhos tried to hold them back and said, ‘Alas, poor wretches
    that we are, what will become of us? Rush not on your ruin by going to the
    house of Circe, who will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall
    have to keep guard over her house. Remember how the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> treated us when our comrades went
    inside his cave, and Odysseus with them. It was all through his sheer folly
    that those men lost their lives.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="438" unit="line"/>"When I heard him I was in two minds whether or
    no to draw the keen blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in
    spite of his being a near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him
    and said, ‘Sir, if it may so be, let this man stay here and mind the ship, but
    take the rest of us with you to Circe's house.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="446" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="446" unit="line"/>"On this we all went inland, and Eurylokhos was
    not left behind after all, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe
    reprimand that I had given him.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="449" unit="line"/>"Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men
    who had been left behind were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also
    given them woolen cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all
    comfortably at dinner in her house. As soon as the men saw each other face to
    face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud till the whole
    palace rang again. Thereon Circe came up to me and said, ‘Odysseus, noble son
    of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, tell your men to leave
    off crying; I know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill
    you have fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so
    stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and hearty as you
    were when you left <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>; for at
    present you are weakened both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking
    of the hardships - you have suffered during your travels, so that you have no
    more cheerfulness left in you.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="466" unit="line"/>"Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed
    with Circe for a whole twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of
    meat and wine. But when the year had passed, and the seasons [<term xml:lang="grc">hôrai</term>] had turned round, and the waning of moons and
    the long days had begun, my men called me apart and said, ‘Sir, it is time you
    began to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see your
    house and native country at all.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="475" unit="line"/>"Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon
    through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on
    meat and wine, but when the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid
    themselves down to sleep in the covered cloisters. I, however, after I had got
    into bed with Circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to
    what I had got to say. ‘Circe,’ said I, ‘please keep the promise you made me
    about furthering me on my homeward voyage. I want to get back and so do my men,
    they are always pestering me with their complaints as soon as ever your back is
    turned.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="487" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="487" unit="line"/>"And the goddess answered, ‘Odysseus, noble son
    of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, you shall none of you
    stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there is another journey which
    you have got to take before you can sail homewards. You must go to the house of
    Hades and of dread Persephone to consult the ghost [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] of the blind Theban seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>] Teiresias whose mind [<term xml:lang="grc">phrenes</term>] is
    still in place within him. To him alone has Persephone left his consciousness
    [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] even in death, but the other ghosts flit
    about aimlessly.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="496" unit="line"/>"I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in
    bed and wept, and would gladly have lived no longer to see the light of the
    sun, but presently when I was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I
    said, ‘And who shall guide me upon this voyage - for the house of Hades is a
    port that no ship can reach.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="504" unit="line"/>"‘You will want no guide,’ she answered; ‘raise
    you mast, set your white sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow
    you there of itself. When your ship has traversed the waters of Okeanos, you
    will reach the fertile shore of Persephone's country with its groves of tall
    poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your ship upon
    the shore of Okeanos, and go straight on to the dark abode of Hades. You will
    find it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethon and Cocytus (which is a
    branch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron, and you will see a rock near it,
    just where the two roaring rivers run into one another.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="516" unit="line"/>"‘When you have reached this spot, as I now
    tell you, dig a trench a cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour
    into it as a drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then
    wine, and in the third place water-sprinkling white barley meal over the whole.
    Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble ghosts, and promise
    them that when you get back to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>
    you will sacrifice a barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load
    the pyre with good things. More particularly you must promise that Teiresias
    shall have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in all your flocks.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="526" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="526" unit="line"/>"‘When you shall have thus besought the ghosts
    with your prayers, offer them a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads
    towards Erebus; but yourself turn away from them as though you would make
    towards the river. On this, many dead men's ghosts [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhai</term>] will come to you, and you must tell your men to skin the
    two sheep that you have just killed, and offer them as a burnt sacrifice with
    prayers to Hades and to Persephone. Then draw your sword and sit there, so as
    to prevent any other poor ghost from coming near the spilt blood before
    Teiresias shall have answered your questions. The seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>] will presently come to you, and will tell you about your
    voyage - what stages you are to make, and how you are to sail the sea so as to
    reach your home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>].’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="541" unit="line"/>"It was day-break by the time she had done
    speaking, so she dressed me in my shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a
    beautiful light gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden
    girdle round her waist, and she covered her head with a mantle. Then I went
    about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly to each of
    them man by man: ‘You must not lie sleeping here any longer,’ said I to them,
    ‘we must be going, for Circe has told me all about it.’ And this they did as I
    bade them.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="551" unit="line"/>"Even so, however, I did not get them away
    without misadventure. We had with us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very
    remarkable for sense or courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the
    house-top away from the rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool.
    When he heard the noise of the men bustling about, he jumped up on a sudden and
    forgot all about coming down by the main staircase, so he tumbled right off the
    roof and broke his neck, and his soul [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] went
    down to the house of Hades.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="561" unit="line"/>"When I had got the men together I said to
    them, ‘You think you are about to start home again, but Circe has explained to
    me that instead of this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Persephone
    to consult the ghost of the Theban seer Teiresias.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:10"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="566" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="566" unit="line"/>"The men were broken-hearted as they heard me,
    and threw themselves on the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they
    did not mend matters by crying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and
    lamenting our fate, Circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast
    hard by the ship. She passed through the midst of us without our knowing it,
    for who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does not wish to be
    seen? <milestone n="574" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

