+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Thus did they fight about the ship of
    Protesilaos. Then Patroklos drew near to Achilles with tears welling from his
    eyes, as from some spring whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high
    precipice. When Achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for him and said,
    "Why, Patroklos, do you stand there weeping like some silly child that comes
    running to her mother, and begs to be taken up and carried- she catches hold of
    her mother's dress to stay her though she is in a hurry, and looks tearfully up
    until her mother carries her - even such tears, Patroklos, are you now
    shedding. Have you anything to say to the Myrmidons or to myself? or have you
    had news from <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName> which you
    alone know? They tell me Menoitios son of Aktor is still alive, as also Peleus
    son of Aiakos, among the Myrmidons - men whose loss we two should bitterly
    deplore; or are you grieving about the Argives and the way in which they are
    being killed at the ships, through their own high-handed doings? Do not hide in
    your mind [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] anything from me but tell me that
    both of us may know about it." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="20" unit="line"/>Then, O horseman Patroklos, with a deep sigh you
    answered, "Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, do not
    be angry, but I feel grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] for the disaster
    that has now befallen the Argives. All those who have been their champions so
    far are lying at the ships, wounded by sword or spear. Brave Diomedes son of
    Tydeus has been hit with a spear, while famed Odysseus and Agamemnon have
    received sword-wounds;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="27" unit="line"/>Eurypylos again has been struck with an arrow in
    the thigh; skilled apothecaries are attending to these heroes, and healing them
    of their wounds; are you still, O Achilles, so inexorable? May it never be my
    lot to nurse such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own good
    name. Who in future story will speak well of you unless you now save the
    Argives from ruin? You know no pity; horseman Peleus was not your father nor
    Thetis your mother, but the gray sea bore you and the sheer cliffs begot you,
    so cruel and remorseless are you in your thinking [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>]. If however you are kept back through knowledge of some
    oracle, or if your mother Thetis has told you something from the mouth of Zeus,
    at least send me and the Myrmidons with me, if I may bring deliverance to the
    Danaans. Let me moreover wear your armor; the Trojans may thus mistake me for
    you and quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the Achaeans may have
    breathing time- which while they are fighting may hardly be. We who are fresh
    might soon drive tired men back from our ships and tents to their own city." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="46" unit="line"/>He knew not what he was asking, nor that he was
    suing for his own destruction. Achilles was deeply moved and answered, "What,
    noble Patroklos, are you saying? I know no prophesyings which I am heeding, nor
    has my mother told me anything from the mouth of Zeus, but I am cut to the very
    heart with grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] that one of my own rank
    should dare to rob me because he is more powerful than I am. This grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>], after all that I have gone through, is more
    than I can endure. The girl whom the sons of the Achaeans chose for me, whom I
    won as the fruit of my spear on having sacked a city - her has King Agamemnon
    taken from me as though I were some common vagrant. Still, let bygones be
    bygones: no man may keep his anger for ever; I said I would not relent till
    battle and the cry of war had reached my own ships; nevertheless, now gird my
    armor about your shoulders, and lead the Myrmidons to battle, for the dark
    cloud of Trojans has burst furiously over our fleet;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="67" unit="line"/>the Argives are driven back on to the beach,
    cooped within a narrow space, and the whole people of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> has taken heart to sally out against
    them, because they see not the visor of my helmet gleaming near them. Had they
    seen this, there would not have been a creek nor grip that had not been filled
    with their dead as they fled back again. And so it would have been, if only
    King Agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. As it is the Trojans have beset our
    host. Diomedes son of Tydeus no longer wields his spear to defend the Danaans,
    neither have I heard the voice of the son of Atreus coming from his hated
    [<term xml:lang="grc">ekhthrê</term>] head, whereas that of murderous Hektor
    rings in my cars as he gives orders to the Trojans, who triumph over the
    Achaeans and fill the whole plain with their cry of battle. But even so,
    Patroklos, fall upon them and save the fleet, lest the Trojans fire it and
    deprive us of our safe homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]. Bring
    to fulfillment [<term xml:lang="grc">telos</term>] what I now order you to do,
    so that you may win me great honor [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>] from all
    the Danaans, and that they may restore the girl to me again and give me rich
    gifts into the bargain. When you have driven the Trojans from the ships, come
    back again. Though Hera's thundering husband should put triumph within your
    reach, do not fight the Trojans further in my absence, or you will rob me of
    glory that should be mine. And do not for lust of battle go on killing the
    Trojans nor lead the Achaeans on to <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>, lest one of the ever-living gods from <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> attack you - for Phoebus Apollo loves
    them well: return when you have freed the ships from peril, and let others wage
    war upon the plain. Would, by father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo, that not a
    single man of all the Trojans might be left alive, nor yet of the Argives, but
    that we two might be alone left to tear aside the mantle that veils the brow of
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="101" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse. But Ajax could no
    longer hold his ground for the shower of darts that rained upon him; the will
    [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] of Zeus and the javelins of the Trojans
    were too much for him; the helmet that gleamed about his temples rang with the
    continuous clatter of the missiles that kept pouring on to it and on to the
    cheek-pieces that protected his face. Moreover his left shoulder was tired with
    having held his shield so long, yet for all this, let fly at him as they would,
    they could not make him give ground. He could hardly draw his breath, the sweat
    rained from every pore of his body, he had not a moment's respite, and on all
    sides he was beset by danger upon danger. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="112" unit="line"/>And now, tell me, O Muses that hold your
    mansions on <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, how fire was
    thrown upon the ships of the Achaeans. Hektor came close up and let drive with
    his great sword at the ashen spear of Ajax. He cut it clean in two just behind
    where the point was fastened on to the shaft of the spear. Ajax, therefore, had
    now nothing but a headless spear, while the bronze point flew some way off and
    came ringing down on to the ground. Ajax knew the hand of heaven in this, and
    was dismayed at seeing that Zeus had now left him utterly defenseless and was
    willing victory for the Trojans. Therefore he drew back, and the Trojans flung
    fire upon the ship which was at once wrapped in flame. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="124" unit="line"/>The fire was now flaring about the ship's
    stern, whereon Achilles smote his two thighs and said to Patroklos, "Up, noble
    horseman, for I see the glare of hostile fire at our fleet; up, lest they
    destroy our ships, and there be no way by which we may retreat. Gird on your
    armor at once while I call our people together." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="131" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="131" unit="line"/>As he spoke Patroklos put on his armor. First
    he greaved his legs with greaves of good make, and fitted with ankle-clasps of
    silver; after this he donned the cuirass of the son of Aiakos, richly inlaid
    and studded. He hung his silver-studded sword of bronze about his shoulders,
    and then his mighty shield. On his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought,
    with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it. He grasped two
    redoubtable spears that suited his hands, but he did not take the spear of
    noble Achilles, so stout and strong,</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="141" unit="line"/>for none other of the Achaeans could wield it,
    though Achilles could do so easily. This was the ashen spear from Mount Pelion,
    which Chiron had cut upon a mountain top and had given to Peleus, wherewith to
    deal out death among heroes. He bade Automedon yoke his horses with all speed,
    for he was the man whom he held in honor next after Achilles, and on whose
    support in battle he could rely most firmly. Automedon therefore yoked the
    fleet horses <placeName key="perseus,Xanthos">Xanthos</placeName> and Balios,
    steeds that could fly like the wind: these were they whom the harpy Podarge
    bore to the west wind, as she was grazing in a meadow by the waters of the
    river Okeanos. In the side traces he set the noble horse Pedasos, whom Achilles
    had brought away with him when he sacked the city of Eetion, and who, mortal
    steed though he was, could take his place along with those that were immortal. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="155" unit="line"/>Meanwhile Achilles went about everywhere among
    the tents, and bade his Myrmidons put on their armor. Even as fierce ravening
    wolves that are feasting upon a horned stag which they have killed upon the
    mountains, and their jaws are red with blood - they go in a pack to lap water
    from the clear spring with their long thin tongues; and they reek of blood and
    slaughter; they know not what fear is, for it is hunger drives them - even so
    did the leaders and counselors of the Myrmidons gather round the good squire
    [<term xml:lang="grc">therapôn</term>] of the fleet descendant of Aiakos,
    and among them stood Achilles himself cheering on both men and horses. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="168" unit="line"/>Fifty ships had noble Achilles brought to
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and in each there was a crew
    of fifty oarsmen. Over these he set five leaders whom he could trust, while he
    was himself commander over them all. Menesthios of the gleaming corselet, son
    to the river Spercheios that streams from heaven, was leader of the first
    company. Fair Polydora daughter of Peleus bore him to ever-flowing Spercheios -
    a woman mated with a god - but he was called son of Boros son of Perieres, with
    whom his mother was living as his wedded wife, and who gave great wealth to
    gain her.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="178" unit="line"/>The second company was led by noble Eudoros,
    son to an unwedded woman. Polymele, daughter of Phylas, graceful in dancing
    [<term xml:lang="grc">khoros</term>], bore him; the mighty slayer of
    <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName> was enamored of her as he
    saw her among the singing women at a dance [<term xml:lang="grc">khoros</term>]
    held in honor of Artemis the rushing huntress of the golden arrows; he
    therefore - Hermes, giver of all good - went with her into an upper chamber,
    and lay with her in secret, whereon she bore him a noble son Eudoros,
    singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. When Eileithuia goddess of the
    pains of child-birth brought him to the light of day, and he saw the face of
    the sun, mighty Echekles son of Aktor took the mother to wife, and gave great
    wealth to gain her, but her father Phylas brought the child up, and took care
    of him, doting as fondly upon him as though he were his own son. The third
    company was led by Peisandros son of Maimalos, the finest spearman among all
    the Myrmidons next to Achilles' own comrade Patroklos. The old horseman Phoenix
    was leader of the fourth company, and Alkimedon, noble son of Laerceus of the
    fifth. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="198" unit="line"/>When Achilles had chosen [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] his men and had stationed them all with their leaders, he
    charged them straitly saying, "Myrmidons, remember your threats against the
    Trojans while you were at the ships in the time of my anger, and you were all
    complaining of me. ‘Cruel son of Peleus,’ you would say, ‘your mother must have
    suckled you on gall, so ruthless are you. You keep us here at the ships against
    our will; if you are so relentless it were better we went home over the sea.’
    Often have you gathered and thus chided with me. The hour is now come for those
    high feats of arms that you have so long been pining for, therefore keep high
    hearts each one of you to do battle with the Trojans." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="210" unit="line"/>With these words he put heart and soul into
    them all, and they serried their companies yet more closely when they heard the
    of their king. As the stones which a builder sets in the wall of some high
    house which is to give shelter from the winds - even so closely were the
    helmets and bossed shields set against one another. Shield pressed on shield,
    helm on helm, and man on man; so close were they that the horse-hair plumes on
    the gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each other as they bent their
    heads. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="218" unit="line"/>In front of them all two men put on their armor
    - Patroklos and Automedon - two men, with but one mind to lead the Myrmidons.
    Then Achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest which
    silver-footed Thetis had given him to take on board ship, and which she had
    filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good thick rugs. In this
    chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which no man but himself might
    drink, nor would he make offering from it to any other god save only to father
    Zeus. He took the cup from the chest and cleansed it with sulfur; this done he
    rinsed it clean water, and after he had washed his hands he drew wine. Then he
    stood in the middle of the court and prayed, looking towards heaven, and making
    his drink-offering of wine; nor was he unseen of Zeus whose joy is in thunder.
    "King Zeus," he cried, "lord of <placeName key="perseus,Dodona">Dodona</placeName>, god of the Pelasgi, you who dwell afar, you who hold
    wintry <placeName key="perseus,Dodona">Dodona</placeName> in your sway, where
    your seers the Selloi dwell around you with their feet unwashed and their
    couches made upon the ground - if you heard me when I prayed to you aforetime,
    and did me honor while you sent disaster on the Achaeans, grant me now the
    fulfillment of yet this further prayer. I shall stay here where my assembly
    [<term xml:lang="grc">agôn</term>] of ships are lying, but I shall send my
    comrade into battle at the head of many Myrmidons. Grant, O all-seeing Zeus,
    that victory may go with him; put your courage into his heart that Hektor may
    learn whether my squire [<term xml:lang="grc">therapôn</term>] is man enough to
    fight alone, or whether his might is only then so indomitable when I myself
    enter the turmoil of war. Afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry
    of battle from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his armor and
    his comrades, fighters in close combat." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="249" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="249" unit="line"/>Thus did he pray, and all-counseling Zeus heard
    his prayer. Part of it he did indeed grant him - but not the whole. He granted
    that Patroklos should thrust back war and battle from the ships, but refused to
    let him come safely out of the fight. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="252" unit="line"/>When he had made his drink-offering and had
    thus prayed, Achilles went inside his tent and put back the cup into his chest. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="255" unit="line"/>Then he again came out, for he still loved to
    look upon the fierce fight that raged between the Trojans and Achaeans. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="257" unit="line"/>Meanwhile the armed band that was about
    Patroklos marched on till they sprang high in hope upon the Trojans. They came
    swarming out like wasps whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly
    children love to tease, whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung
    - or again, if a wayfarer going along the road vexes them by accident, every
    wasp will come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones- even with such
    rage and courage did the Myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their cry of
    battle rose heavenwards. Patroklos called out to his men at the top of his
    voice, "Myrmidons, followers of Achilles son of Peleus, be men my friends,
    fight with might and with main, that we may win glory for the son of Peleus,
    who is far the foremost man at the ships of the Argives - he, and his close
    fighting followers [therapontes]. The son of Atreus King Agamemnon will thus
    recognize his derangement [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>] in showing no
    respect to the bravest of the Achaeans." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="275" unit="line"/>With these words he put heart and soul into
    them all, and they fell in a body upon the Trojans. The ships rang again with
    the cry which the Achaeans raised, and when the Trojans saw the brave son of
    Menoitios and his squire [<term xml:lang="grc">therapôn</term>] all gleaming in
    their armor, they were daunted and their battalions were thrown into confusion,
    for they thought the fleet son of Peleus must now have put aside his anger, and
    have been reconciled to Agamemnon; every one, therefore, looked round about to
    see whither he might flee for safety. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="284" unit="line"/>Patroklos first aimed a spear into the middle
    of the press where men were packed most closely, by the stern of the ship of
    Protesilaos. He hit Pyraikhmes who had led his Paeonian horsemen from the
    <placeName key="perseus,Amydon">Amydon</placeName> and the broad waters of
    the river <placeName key="tgn,7015932">Axios</placeName>; the spear struck him
    on the right shoulder, and with a groan he fell backwards in the dust; on this
    his men were thrown into confusion, for by killing their leader, who was the
    finest warrior among them, Patroklos struck panic into them all. He thus drove
    them from the ship and quenched the fire that was then blazing - leaving the
    half-burnt ship to lie where it was. The Trojans were now driven back with a
    shout that rent the skies, while the Danaans poured after them from their
    ships, shouting also without ceasing. As when Zeus, gatherer of the
    thunder-cloud, spreads a dense canopy on the top of some lofty mountain, and
    all the peaks, the jutting headlands, and forest glades show out in the great
    light that flashes from the bursting heavens, even so when the Danaans had now
    driven back the fire from their ships, they took breath for a little while; but
    the fury of the fight was not yet over, for the Trojans were not driven back in
    utter rout, but still gave battle, and were ousted from their ground only by
    sheer fighting. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="306" unit="line"/>The fight then became more scattered, and the
    chieftains killed one another when and how they could. The valiant son of
    Menoitios first drove his spear into the thigh of Areilykos just as he was
    turning round; the point went clean through, and broke the bone so that he fell
    forward. Meanwhile Menelaos struck Thoas in the chest, where it was exposed
    near the rim of his shield, and he fell dead. The son of Phyleus saw Amphiklos
    about to attack him, and ere he could do so took aim at the upper part of his
    thigh, where the muscles are thicker than in any other part; the spear tore
    through all the sinews of the leg, and his eyes were closed in darkness.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="316" unit="line"/>Of the sons of Nestor one, Antilokhos, speared
    Atymnios, driving the point of the spear through his throat, and down he fell.
    Maris then sprang on Antilokhos in hand-to-hand fight to avenge his brother,
    and bestrode the body spear in hand; but valiant Thrasymedes was too quick for
    him, and in a moment had struck him in the shoulder ere he could deal his blow;
    his aim was true, and the spear severed all the muscles at the root of his arm,
    and tore them right down to the bone, so he fell heavily to the ground and his
    eyes were closed in darkness. Thus did these two noble comrades of Sarpedon go
    down to Erebos slain by the two sons of Nestor; they were the warrior sons of
    Amisodoros, who had reared the invincible Chimaera, to the bane of many. Ajax
    son of Oileus sprang on Kleoboulos and took him alive as he was entangled in
    the crush; but he killed him then and there by a sword-blow on the neck. The
    sword reeked with his blood, while dark death and the strong hand of fate
    gripped him and closed his eyes. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="335" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="335" unit="line"/>Peneleos and Lykon now met in close fight, for
    they had missed each other with their spears. They had both thrown without
    effect, so now they drew their swords. Lykon struck the plumed crest of
    Peneleos' helmet but his sword broke at the hilt, while Peneleos smote Lykon on
    the neck under the ear. The blade sank so deep that the head was held on by
    nothing but the skin, and there was no more life left in him. Meriones gave
    chase to Akamas on foot and caught him up just as he was about to mount his
    chariot; he drove a spear through his right shoulder so that he fell headlong
    from the car, and his eyes were closed in darkness. Idomeneus speared Erymas in
    the mouth; the bronze point of the spear went clean through it beneath the
    brain, crashing in among the white bones and smashing them up. His teeth were
    all of them knocked out and the blood came gushing in a stream from both his
    eyes; it also came gurgling up from his mouth and nostrils, and the darkness of
    death enfolded him round about. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="351" unit="line"/>Thus did these chieftains of the Danaans each
    of them kill his man. As ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on
    them when they are alone on the hillsides and have strayed from the main flock
    through the carelessness of the shepherd - and when the wolves see this they
    pounce upon them at once because they cannot defend themselves- even so did the
    Danaans now fall on the Trojans, who fled with ill-omened cries in their panic
    and had no more fight left in them. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="358" unit="line"/>Meanwhile great Ajax kept on trying to drive a
    spear into Hektor, but Hektor was so skillful that he held his broad shoulders
    well under cover of his ox-hide shield, ever on the look-out for the whizzing
    of the arrows and the heavy thud of the spears. He well knew that the fortunes
    of the day had changed, but still stood his ground and tried to protect his
    comrades. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="364" unit="line"/>As when a cloud goes up into heaven from
    <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, rising out of a clear sky
    when Zeus is brewing a gale - even with such panic stricken rout did the
    Trojans now flee, and there was no order in their going. Hektor's fleet horses
    bore him and his armor out of the fight, and he left the Trojan host penned in
    by the deep trench against their will. Many a yoke of horses snapped the pole
    of their chariots in the trench and left their master's car behind them.
    Patroklos gave chase, calling impetuously on the Danaans and full of fury
    against the Trojans, who, being now no longer in a body, filled all the ways
    with their cries of panic and rout; the air was darkened with the clouds of
    dust they raised, and the horses strained every nerve in their flight from the
    tents and ships towards the city. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="377" unit="line"/>Patroklos kept on heading his horses wherever
    he saw most men fleeing in confusion, cheering on his men the while. Chariots
    were being smashed in all directions, and many a man came tumbling down from
    his own car to fall beneath the wheels of that of Patroklos, whose immortal
    steeds, given by the gods to Peleus, sprang over the trench at a bound as they
    sped onward. He was intent on trying to get near Hektor, for he had set his
    heart on spearing him, but Hektor's horses were now hurrying him away. As the
    whole dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day when Zeus rains his
    hardest to punish men for judging [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] crookedly
    in their courts, and arriving justice there from without heed to the decrees
    [<term xml:lang="grc">themistes</term>] of heaven - all the rivers run full
    and the torrents tear many a new channel as they roar headlong from the
    mountains to the dark sea, and it fares ill with the works of men - even such
    was the stress and strain of the Trojan horses in their flight. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="394" unit="line"/>Patroklos now cut off the battalions that were
    nearest to him and drove them back to the ships. They were doing their best to
    reach the city, but he would not let them, and bore down on them between the
    river and the ships and wall. Many a fallen comrade did he then avenge. First
    he hit Pronoos with a spear on the chest where it was exposed near the rim of
    his shield, and he fell heavily to the ground. Next he sprang on Thestor son of
    Enops, who was sitting all huddled up in his chariot, for he had lost his head
    and the reins had been torn out of his hands. Patroklos went up to him and
    drove a spear into his right jaw; he thus hooked him by the teeth and the spear
    pulled him over the rim of his car, as one who sits at the end of some jutting
    rock and draws a strong fish out of the sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>] with a hook and a line - even so with his spear did he pull
    Thestor all gaping from his chariot; he then threw him down on his face and he
    died while falling. On this, as Erylaos was on to attack him, he struck him
    full on the head with a stone, and his brains were all battered inside his
    helmet, whereon he fell headlong to the ground and the pangs of death took hold
    upon him. Then he laid low, one after the other, Erymas, Amphoteros, Epaltes,
    Tlepolemos, Echios son of Damastor, Pyris, Ipheus, Euippos and Polymelos son of
    Argeas. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="419" unit="line"/>Now when Sarpedon saw his comrades, men who
    wore unbelted tunics, being overcome by Patroklos son of Menoitios, he rebuked
    the Lycians saying. "Shame [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>] on you, where
    are you fleeing to? Show your mettle; I will myself meet this man in fight and
    learn who it is that is so masterful; he has done us much hurt, and has
    stretched many a brave man upon the ground." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="426" unit="line"/>He sprang from his chariot as he spoke, and
    Patroklos, when he saw this, leaped on to the ground also. The two then rushed
    at one another with loud cries like eagle-beaked crook-taloned vultures that
    scream and tear at one another in some high mountain fastness. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="431" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="431" unit="line"/>The son of scheming Kronos looked down upon
    them in pity and said to Hera who was his wife and sister, "Alas, that it
    should be the lot of Sarpedon whom I love so dearly to perish by the hand of
    Patroklos. I am in two minds whether to catch him up out of the fight and set
    him down safe and sound in the fertile district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] of <placeName key="tgn,7001294">Lycia</placeName>, or to let
    him now fall by the hand of the son of Menoitios." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="439" unit="line"/>And Hera answered, "Most dread son of Kronos,
    what is this that you are saying? Would you snatch a mortal man, whose doom has
    long been fated, out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we shall not all
    of us be of your mind. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart, that if
    you send Sarpedon safely to his own home, some other of the gods will be also
    wanting to escort his son out of battle, for there are many sons of gods
    fighting round the city of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and
    you will make every one jealous. If, however, you are fond of him and pity him,
    let him indeed fall by the hand of Patroklos, but as soon as the life [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] is gone out of him, send Death and sweet Sleep
    to bear him off the field and take him to the broad district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] of <placeName key="tgn,7001294">Lycia</placeName>, where his brothers and his kinsmen will bury him with
    mound and pillar, in due honor to the dead." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="458" unit="line"/>The sire of gods and men assented, but he shed
    a rain of blood upon the earth in honor [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>] of
    his son whom Patroklos was about to kill on the fertile plain of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> far from his home. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="462" unit="line"/>When they were now come close to one another
    Patroklos struck Thrasydemos, the brave squire [<term xml:lang="grc">therapôn</term>] of Sarpedon, in the lower part of the belly, and killed
    him. Sarpedon then aimed a spear at Patroklos and missed him, but he struck the
    horse Pedasos in the right shoulder, and it screamed aloud as it lay, groaning
    in the dust until the life went out of it. The other two horses began to
    plunge; the pole of the chariot cracked and they got entangled in the reins
    through the fall of the horse that was yoked along with them; but Automedon
    knew what to do; without the loss of a moment he drew the keen blade that hung
    by his sturdy thigh and cut the third horse adrift; whereon the other two
    righted themselves, and pulling hard at the reins again went together into
    battle. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="477" unit="line"/>Sarpedon now took a second aim at Patroklos,
    and again missed him, the point of the spear passed over his left shoulder
    without hitting him. Patroklos then aimed in his turn, and the spear sped not
    from his hand in vain, for he hit Sarpedon just where the midriff surrounds the
    ever-beating heart. He fell like some oak or silver poplar or tall pine to
    which woodmen have laid their axes upon the mountains to make timber for
    ship-building - even so did he lie stretched at full length in front of his
    chariot and horses, moaning and clutching at the blood-stained dust. As when a
    lion springs with a bound upon a herd of cattle and fastens on a great black
    bull which dies bellowing in its clutches - even so did the leader of the
    Lycian warriors struggle in death as he fell by the hand of Patroklos. He
    called on his trusty comrade and said, "Glaukos, my brother, hero among heroes,
    put forth all your strength, fight with might and main, now if ever quit
    yourself like a valiant warrior. First go about among the Lycian leaders and
    bid them fight for Sarpedon; then yourself also do battle to save my armor from
    being taken. My name will haunt you henceforth and for ever if the Achaeans rob
    me of my armor now that I have fallen near the assembly [<term xml:lang="grc">agôn</term>] of their ships. Do your very utmost and call all my people
    together." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="503" unit="line"/>The outcome [<term xml:lang="grc">telos</term>]
    of death closed his eyes as he spoke. Patroklos planted his heel on his breast
    and drew the spear from his body, whereon his diaphragm came out along with it,
    and he drew out both spear-point and Sarpedon's life-breath [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] at the same time. Hard by the Myrmidons held
    his snorting steeds, who were wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by
    their lords. Glaukos was overcome with grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] when he heard what Sarpedon said, for he could not help him. He
    had to support his arm with his other hand, being in great pain through the
    wound which Teucer's arrow had given him when Teucer was defending the wall as
    he, Glaukos, was assailing it. Therefore he prayed to far-darting Apollo
    saying, "Hear me O king from your seat, may be in the fertile district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] of <placeName key="tgn,7001294">Lycia</placeName>, or may be in <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, for in all places you can hear the prayer of one who is
    in distress, as I now am. I have a grievous wound; my hand is aching with pain,
    there is no staunching the blood, and my whole arm drags by reason of my hurt,
    so that I cannot grasp my sword nor go among my foes and fight them, though our
    prince, Zeus' son Sarpedon, is slain. Zeus defended not his son, do you,
    therefore, O king, heal me of my wound, ease my pain and grant me strength both
    to cheer on the Lycians and to fight along with them round the body of him who
    has fallen." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="527" unit="line"/>Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer.
    He eased his pain, staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new
    strength. Glaukos perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
    answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the Lycian leaders,
    and bade them come to fight about the body of Sarpedon. From these he strode on
    among the Trojans to Polydamas son of Panthoos and Agenor; he then went in
    search of Aeneas and Hektor, and when he had found them he said, "Hektor, you
    have utterly forgotten your allies, who languish here for your sake far from
    friends and home while you do nothing to support them.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="540" unit="line"/>Sarpedon leader of the Lycian warriors has
    fallen - he who was at once the right and might of <placeName key="tgn,7001294">Lycia</placeName>; Ares has laid him low by the spear of Patroklos. Stand
    by him, my friends, and suffer not the Myrmidons to strip him of his armor, nor
    to treat his body with contumely in revenge for all the Danaans whom we have
    speared at the ships." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="548" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="548" unit="line"/>As he spoke the Trojans were plunged in extreme
    and ungovernable grief [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>]; for Sarpedon,
    alien though he was, had been one of the main stays of their city, both as
    having many people with him, and himself the foremost among them all. Led by
    Hektor, who was infuriated by the fall of Sarpedon, they made instantly for the
    Danaans with all their might, while the undaunted spirit of Patroklos son of
    Menoitios cheered on the Achaeans. First he spoke to the two Ajaxes, men who
    needed no bidding. "Ajaxes," said he, "may it now please you to show yourselves
    the men you have always been, or even better- Sarpedon is fallen - he who was
    first to overleap the wall of the Achaeans; let us take the body and outrage
    it; let us strip the armor from his shoulders, and kill his comrades if they
    try to rescue his body." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="562" unit="line"/>He spoke to men who of themselves were full
    eager; both sides, therefore, the Trojans and Lycians on the one hand, and the
    Myrmidons and Achaeans on the other, strengthened their battalions, and fought
    desperately about the body of Sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while. Mighty was
    the din of their armor as they came together, and Zeus shed a thick darkness
    over the fight, to increase the ordeal [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] of
    the battle over the body of his son. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="569" unit="line"/>At first the Trojans made some headway against
    the Achaeans, for one of the best men among the Myrmidons was killed, Epeigeus,
    son of noble Agakles who had erewhile been king in the good city of Boudeion;
    but presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge with
    Peleus and Thetis, who sent him to <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName> the land of noble steeds to fight the Trojans under
    Achilles. Hektor now struck him on the head with a stone just as he had caught
    hold of the body,</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="578" unit="line"/>and his brains inside his helmet were all
    battered in, so that he fell face foremost upon the body of Sarpedon, and there
    died. Patroklos was enraged with grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] over
    by the death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a
    hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. Even so swiftly, O noble
    horseman Patroklos, did you make straight for the Lycians and Trojans to avenge
    your comrade. Forthwith he struck Sthenelaos the son of Ithaimenes on the neck
    with a stone, and broke the tendons that join it to the head and spine. On this
    Hektor and the front rank of his men gave ground. As far as a man can throw a
    javelin in competition [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] for some prize, or
    even in battle - so far did the Trojans now retreat before the Achaeans.
    Glaukos, leader of the Lycians, was the first to rally them, by killing
    Bathykles son of Khalkon who lived in <placeName key="tgn,1000074">Hellas</placeName> and was supreme in wealth [<term xml:lang="grc">olbos</term>] among the Myrmidons. Glaukos turned round suddenly, just as
    Bathykles who was pursuing him was about to lay hold of him, and drove his
    spear right into the middle of his chest, whereon he fell heavily to the
    ground, and the fall of so good a man filled the Achaeans with dismay [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>], while the Trojans were exultant, and came up
    in a body round the corpse. Nevertheless the Achaeans, mindful of their
    prowess, bore straight down upon them. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="603" unit="line"/>Meriones then killed a helmed warrior of the
    Trojans, Laogonos son of Onetor, who was priest of Zeus of <placeName key="tgn,1105013">Mount Ida</placeName>, and was honored in the district
    [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] as though he were a god. Meriones struck
    him under the jaw and ear, so that life went out of him and the darkness of
    death laid hold upon him. Aeneas then aimed a spear at Meriones, hoping to hit
    him under the shield as he was advancing, but Meriones saw it coming and
    stooped forward to avoid it, whereon the spear flew past him and the point
    stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering till Ares robbed it
    of its force. The spear, therefore, sped from Aeneas' hand in vain and fell
    quivering to the ground. Aeneas was angry and said, "Meriones, you are a good
    dancer, but if I had hit you my spear would soon have made an end of you." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="619" unit="line"/>And Meriones answered, "Aeneas, for all your
    bravery, you will not be able to make an end of every one who comes against
    you. You are only a mortal like myself, and if I were to hit you in the middle
    of your shield with my spear, however strong and self-confident you may be, I
    should soon vanquish you, and you would yield your life-breath [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] to Hades of the noble steeds." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="627" unit="line"/>On this the son of Menoitios rebuked him and
    said, "Meriones, hero though you be, you should not speak thus; taunting
    speeches, my good friend, will not make the Trojans draw away from the dead
    body; some of them must go under ground first; the outcome [<term xml:lang="grc">telos</term>] of battle is in the force of hands, while the
    outcome of deliberation is words; fight, therefore, and say nothing." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="632" unit="line"/>He led the way as he spoke and the hero went
    forward with him. As the sound of woodcutters in some forest glade upon the
    mountains- and the thud of their axes is heard afar - even such a din now rose
    from earth-clash of bronze armor and of good ox-hide shields, as men smote each
    other with their swords and spears pointed at both ends. A man had need of good
    eyesight now to know Sarpedon, so covered was he from head to foot with spears
    and blood and dust. Men swarmed about the body, as flies that buzz round the
    full milk-pails in the season [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>] of spring when
    they are brimming with milk - even so did they gather round Sarpedon; nor did
    Zeus turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept looking at
    it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill Patroklos, and
    considering whether Hektor should be allowed to end him now in the fight round
    the body of Sarpedon, and strip him of his armor, or whether he should let him
    give yet further trouble [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] to the Trojans. In
    the end, he deemed it best that the brave squire [<term xml:lang="grc">therapôn</term>] of Achilles son of Peleus should drive Hektor and the
    Trojans back towards the city and take the lives of many. First, therefore, he
    made Hektor turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his chariot and fled, bidding
    the other Trojans flee also,</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="658" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="658" unit="line"/>for he saw that the scales of Zeus had turned
    against him. Neither would the brave Lycians stand firm; they were dismayed
    when they saw their king lying struck to the heart amid a heap of corpses - for
    when the son of Kronos made the fight wax hot many had fallen above him. The
    Achaeans, therefore stripped the gleaming armor from his shoulders and the
    brave son of Menoitios gave it to his men to take to the ships. Then Zeus lord
    of the storm-cloud said to Apollo, "Dear Phoebus, go, I pray you, and take
    Sarpedon out of range of the weapons; cleanse the black blood from off him, and
    then bear him a long way off where you may wash him in the river, anoint him
    with ambrosia, and clothe him in immortal raiment; this done, commit him to the
    arms of the two fleet messengers, Death, and Sleep, who will carry him
    straightway to the fertile district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] of
    <placeName key="tgn,7001294">Lycia</placeName>, where his brothers and
    kinsmen will give him a funeral, and will raise both mound and pillar to his
    memory, in due honor to the dead." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="676" unit="line"/>Thus he spoke. Apollo obeyed his father's
    saying, and came down from the heights of Ida into the thick of the fight;
    forthwith he took Sarpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a
    long way off, where he washed him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia and
    clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he committed him to the arms of the
    two fleet messengers, Death and Sleep, who presently set him down in the
    fertile district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] of <placeName key="tgn,7001294">Lycia</placeName>. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="684" unit="line"/>Meanwhile Patroklos, with many a shout to his
    horses and to Automedon, pursued the Trojans and Lycians in the pride and
    foolishness of his heart. Had he but obeyed the bidding of the son of Peleus,
    he would have, escaped death and have been scatheless; but the counsels [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] of Zeus pass man's understanding; he will put
    even a brave man to flight and snatch victory from his grasp, or again he will
    set him on to fight, as he now did when he put a high spirit into the heart of
    Patroklos. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="692" unit="line"/>Who then first, and who last, was slain by you,
    O Patroklos, when the gods had now called you to meet your doom? First
    Adrastos, Autonoos, Echeklos, Perimos the son of Megas, Epistor and Melanippos;
    after these he killed Elasus, Moulios, and Pylartes. These he slew, but the
    rest saved themselves by flight. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="698" unit="line"/>The sons of the Achaeans would now have taken
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> by the hands of Patroklos,
    for his spear flew in all directions, had not Phoebus Apollo taken his stand
    upon the wall to defeat his purpose and to aid the Trojans. Thrice did
    Patroklos charge at an angle of the high wall, and thrice did Apollo beat him
    back, striking his shield with his own immortal hands. When Patroklos was
    coming on like a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> for yet a fourth time,
    Apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, "Draw back, noble
    Patroklos, it is not your lot to sack the city of the Trojan chieftains, nor
    yet will it be that of Achilles who is a far better man than you are." On
    hearing this, Patroklos withdrew to some distance and avoided the anger [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>] of Apollo. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="712" unit="line"/>Meanwhile Hektor was waiting with his horses
    inside the Scaean gates, in doubt whether to drive out again and go on
    fighting, or to call the army inside the gates. As he was thus doubting Phoebus
    Apollo drew near him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior Asios, who
    was Hektor's uncle, being own brother to Hecuba, and son of Dymas who lived in
    <placeName key="tgn,7002613">Phrygia</placeName> by the waters of the river
    Sangarios; in his likeness Zeus' son Apollo now spoke to Hektor saying,
    "Hektor, why have you left off fighting? It is ill done of you. If I were as
    much better a man than you, as I am worse, you should soon rue your slackness.
    Drive straight towards Patroklos, if so be that Apollo may grant you a triumph
    over him, and you may kill him." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="726" unit="line"/>With this the god went back into the struggle
    [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>], and Hektor bade Kebriones drive again
    into the fight. Apollo passed in among them, and struck panic into the Argives,
    while he gave triumph to Hektor and the Trojans. Hektor let the other Danaans
    alone and killed no man, but drove straight at Patroklos. Patroklos then sprang
    from his chariot to the ground,</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="734" unit="line"/>with a spear in his left hand, and in his right
    a jagged stone as large as his hand could hold. He stood still and threw it,
    nor did it go far without hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for the
    stone struck Kebriones, Hektor's charioteer, a bastard son of Priam, as he held
    the reins in his hands. The stone hit him on the forehead and drove his brows
    into his head for the bone was smashed, and his eyes fell to the ground at his
    feet. He dropped dead from his chariot as though he were diving, and there was
    no more life left in him. Over him did you then vaunt, O horseman Patroklos,
    saying, "Bless my heart, how active he is, and how well he dives. If we had
    been at sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>] this man would have dived from
    the ship's side and brought up as many oysters as the whole crew could stomach,
    even in rough water, for he has dived beautifully off his chariot on to the
    ground. It seems, then, that there are divers also among the Trojans." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="751" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="751" unit="line"/>As he spoke he flung himself on Kebriones with
    the spring, as it were, of a lion that while attacking a stockyard is himself
    struck in the chest, and his courage is his own bane - even so furiously, O
    Patroklos, did you then spring upon Kebriones. Hektor sprang also from his
    chariot to the ground. The pair then fought over the body of Kebriones. As two
    lions fight fiercely on some high mountain over the body of a stag that they
    have killed, even so did these two mighty warriors, Patroklos son of Menoitios
    and brave Hektor, hack and hew at one another over the corpse of Kebriones.
    Hektor would not let him go when he had once got him by the head, while
    Patroklos kept fast hold of his feet, and a fierce fight raged between the
    other Danaans and Trojans. As the east and south wind buffet one another when
    they beat upon some dense forest on the mountains - there is beech and ash and
    spreading cornel; the to of the trees roar as they beat on one another, and one
    can hear the boughs cracking and breaking -</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="770" unit="line"/>even so did the Trojans and Achaeans spring
    upon one another and lay about each other, and neither side would give way.
    Many a pointed spear fell to ground and many a winged arrow sped from its
    bow-string about the body of Kebriones; many a great stone, moreover, beat on
    many a shield as they fought around his body, but there he lay in the whirling
    clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless of his driving now. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="777" unit="line"/>So long as the sun was still high in mid-heaven
    the weapons of either side were alike deadly, and the people fell; but when he
    went down towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Achaeans proved to be
    beyond all forecast stronger, so that they drew Kebriones out of range of the
    darts and tumult of the Trojans, and stripped the armor from his shoulders.
    Then Patroklos sprang like Ares with fierce intent and a terrific shout upon
    the Trojans, and thrice did he kill nine men; but as he was coming on like a
    <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> for a time, at that moment, O Patroklos,
    was your doom approaching, for Phoebus fought you in fell earnest. Patroklos
    did not see him as he moved about in the crush, for he was enshrouded in thick
    darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his back and his broad
    shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his eyes turned dizzy. Phoebus
    Apollo beat the helmet from off his head, and it rolled rattling off under the
    horses' feet, where its horse-hair plumes were all begrimed with dust and
    blood. Before this, it would not have been right [<term xml:lang="grc">themis</term>] for this to happen. For before, this helmet had served to
    protect the head and comely forehead of the godlike hero Achilles. Now,
    however, Zeus delivered it over to be worn by Hektor. Nevertheless the end of
    Hektor also was near. The bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong, was broken
    in the hand of Patroklos, while his shield that covered him from head to foot
    fell to the ground as did also the band that held it, and Apollo undid the
    fastenings of his corselet. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="805" unit="line"/>At this his mind became clouded in derangement
    [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>]; his limbs failed him, and he stood as one
    dazed; whereon Euphorbos son of Panthoos, a Dardanian, the best spearman of his
    time, as also the finest horseman and fleetest runner, came behind him and
    struck him in the back with a spear, midway between the shoulders. This man as
    soon as ever he had come up with his chariot had dismounted twenty men, so
    proficient was he in all the arts of war - he it was, O horseman Patroklos,
    that first drove a weapon into you, but he did not quite overpower you.
    Euphorbos then ran back into the crowd, after drawing his ashen spear out of
    the wound; he would not stand firm and wait for Patroklos, unarmed though he
    now was, to attack him; but Patroklos unnerved, alike by the blow the god had
    given him and by the spear-wound, drew back under cover of his men in fear for
    his life. Hektor on this, seeing him to be wounded and giving ground, forced
    his way through the ranks, and when close up with him struck him in the lower
    part of the belly with a spear, driving the bronze point right through it, so
    that he fell heavily to the ground to the great of the Achaeans. As when a lion
    has fought some fierce wild-boar and worsted him - the two fight furiously upon
    the mountains over some little fountain at which they would both drink, and the
    lion has beaten the boar till he can hardly breathe - even so did Hektor son of
    Priam take the life of the brave son of Menoitios who had killed so many,
    striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him the while. "Patroklos,"
    said he, "you deemed that you should sack our city, rob our Trojan women of
    their freedom, and carry them off in your ships to your own country. Fool;
    Hektor and his fleet horses were ever straining their utmost to defend them. I
    am foremost of all the Trojan warriors to stave the day of bondage from off
    them; as for you, vultures shall devour you here. Poor wretch, Achilles with
    all his bravery availed you nothing; and yet I ween when you left him he
    charged you straitly saying, ‘Come not back to the ships, horseman Patroklos,
    till you have rent the bloodstained shirt of murderous Hektor about his body.
    Thus I ween did he charge you, and your fool's heart answered him ‘yea’ within
    you." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="843" unit="line"/>Then, as the life ebbed out of you, you
    answered, O horseman Patroklos: "Hektor, vaunt as you will, for Zeus the son of
    Kronos and Apollo have granted you victory; it is they who have vanquished me
    so easily, and they who have stripped the armor from my shoulders; had twenty
    such men as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen before my spear.
    Fate and the son of Leto have overpowered me, and among mortal men Euphorbos;
    you are yourself third only in the killing of me. I say further, and lay my
    saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a little season; death and the
    day of your doom are close upon you, and they will lay you low by the hand of
    Achilles son of Aiakos." When he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in the
    doom [<term xml:lang="grc">telos</term>] of death, his life-breath [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] left his body and flitted down to the house of
    Hades, mourning its sad fate and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its
    manhood. Dead though he was, Hektor still spoke to him saying, "Patroklos, why
    should you thus foretell my doom? Who knows but Achilles, son of lovely Thetis,
    may be smitten by my spear and die before me?" </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="862" unit="line"/>As he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the
    wound, planting his foot upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its
    back. He then went spear in hand after Automedon, squire [<term xml:lang="grc">therapôn</term>] of the fleet descendant of Aiakos, for he longed to lay
    him low, but the immortal steeds which the gods had given as a rich gift to
    Peleus bore him swiftly from the field. <milestone n="867" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

