+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered
    Dawn, appeared, Alkinoos and Odysseus both rose, and Alkinoos led the way to
    the Phaeacian place of assembly, which was near the ships. When they got there
    they sat down side by side on a seat of polished stone, while Athena took the
    form of one of Alkinoos’ servants, and went round the town in order to contrive
    <term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term> for great-hearted Odysseus. She went up
    to the citizens, man by man, and said, "Aldermen and town councilors of the
    Phaeacians, come to the assembly all of you and listen to the stranger who has
    just come off a long voyage to the house of King Alkinoos; he looks like an
    immortal god."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="15" unit="line"/>With these words she made them all want to come,
    and they flocked to the assembly till seats and standing room were alike
    crowded. Every one was struck with the appearance of Odysseus, for Athena had
    beautified [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>] him about the head and
    shoulders, making him look taller and stouter than he really was, that he might
    impress the Phaeacians favorably as being a very remarkable man, and might come
    off well in the many trials [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] of skill to
    which they would challenge him. Then, when they were got together, Alkinoos
    spoke:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="26" unit="line"/>"Hear me," said he, "aldermen and town
    councilors of the Phaeacians, that I may speak even as I am minded. This
    stranger, whoever he may be, has found his way to my house from somewhere or
    other either East or West. He wants an escort and wishes to have the matter
    settled. Let us then get one ready for him, as we have done for others before
    him; indeed, no one who ever yet came to my house has been able to complain of
    me for not speeding on his way soon enough. Let us draw a ship into the sea -
    one that has never yet made a voyage - and man her with two and fifty of our
    choicest [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>] young sailors in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos.</term> Then when you have made fast your oars each by
    his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house to prepare a feast. I will
    provide you with everything. I am giving these instructions to the young men
    who will form the crew, for as regards you aldermen and town councilors, you
    will join me in entertaining our guest in the cloisters. I can take no excuses,
    and we will have Demodokos to sing to us; for there is no bard like him
    whatever he may choose to sing about."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="46" unit="line"/>Alkinoos then led the way, and the others
    followed after, while a servant went to fetch Demodokos. The fifty-two picked
    [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>] oarsmen went to the sea shore as they
    had been told, and when they got there they drew the ship into the water, got
    her mast and sails inside her, bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted
    thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft. They
    moored the vessel a little way out from land, and then came on shore and went
    to the house of King Alkinoos. The outhouses, yards, and all the precincts were
    filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and Alkinoos
    killed them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two oxen. These they
    skinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificent banquet.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="62" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="62" unit="line"/>A servant presently led in the famous bard
    Demodokos, whom the muse had dearly loved, but to whom she had given both good
    and evil, for though she had endowed him with a divine gift of song, she had
    robbed him of his eyesight. Pontonoos set a seat for him among the guests,
    leaning it up against a bearing-post. He hung the lyre for him on a peg over
    his head, and showed him where he was to feel for it with his hands. He also
    set a fair table with a basket of victuals by his side, and a cup of wine from
    which he might drink whenever he was so disposed.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="71" unit="line"/>The company then laid their hands upon the good
    things that were before them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and
    drink, the muse inspired Demodokos to sing the feats [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] of heroes, and most especially a matter whose <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> at that time reached wide heaven, to wit, the
    quarrel [<term xml:lang="grc">neikos</term>] between Odysseus and Achilles, and
    the fierce words that they heaped on one another as they sat together at a
    banquet. But Agamemnon was glad in his <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term> when he
    heard his chieftains quarreling with one another, for Apollo had foretold him
    this at <placeName key="tgn,7010770">Pytho</placeName> when he crossed the
    stone floor to consult the oracle. Here the beginning of the evil started
    rolling down, by the will of Zeus, toward both Danaans and Trojans.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="83" unit="line"/>Thus sang the bard, but Odysseus drew his purple
    mantle over his head and covered his face, for he was ashamed to let the
    Phaeacians see that he was weeping. When the bard left off singing he wiped the
    tears from his eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a
    drink-offering to the gods; but when the Phaeacians pressed Demodokos to sing
    further, for they delighted in his lays, then Odysseus again drew his mantle
    over his head and wept bitterly. No one noticed his distress except Alkinoos,
    who was sitting near him, and heard the heavy sighs that he was heaving. So he
    at once said, "Aldermen and town councilors of the Phaeacians, we have had
    enough now, both of the feast, and of the minstrelsy that is its due
    accompaniment; let us proceed therefore to the athletic sports [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], so that our guest on his return home may be
    able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as boxers,
    wrestlers, jumpers, and runners."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="104" unit="line"/>With these words he led the way, and the others
    followed after. A servant hung Demodokos’ lyre on its peg for him, led him out
    of the room, and set him on the same way as that along which all the chief men
    of the Phaeacians were going to see the sports; a crowd of several thousand
    people followed them, and there were many excellent competitors for all the
    prizes. Akroneos, Okyalos, Elatreus, Nauteus, Prymneus, Anchialos, Eretmeus,
    Ponteus, Proreus, Thoon, Anabesineos, and Amphialos son of Polyneos son of
    Tekton. There was also Euryalos son of Naubolos, who was like Ares himself, and
    was the best looking man among the Phaeacians except Laodamas. Three sons of
    Alkinoos, Laodamas, Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="120" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="120" unit="line"/>The foot races came first. The course was set
    out for them from the starting post, and they raised a dust upon the plain as
    they all flew forward at the same moment. Clytoneus came in first by a long
    way; he left every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that a
    couple of mules can plough in a fallow field. They then turned to the painful
    art of wrestling, and here Euryalos proved to be the best man. Amphialos
    excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing the disc there was no one
    who could approach Elatreus. Alkinoos’ son Laodamas was the best boxer, and he
    it was who presently said, when they had all been diverted with the games
    [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], "Let us ask the stranger whether he
    excels in any of these sports [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>]; he seems
    very powerfully built; his thighs, calves, hands, and neck are of prodigious
    strength, nor is he at all old, but he has suffered much lately, and there is
    nothing like the sea for making havoc with a man, no matter how strong he
    is."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="140" unit="line"/>"You are quite right, Laodamas," replied
    Euryalos, "go up to your guest and speak to him about it yourself."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="143" unit="line"/>When Laodamas heard this he made his way into
    the middle of the crowd and said to Odysseus, "I hope, sir, that you will enter
    yourself in some one or other of our competitions [<term xml:lang="grc">athloi</term>] if you are skilled in any of them - for you seem to know of
    <term xml:lang="grc">athloi</term> . There is no greater <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> for a man all his life long as the showing
    himself good with his hands and feet. Have a try therefore at something, and
    banish all sorrow from your mind. Your return home will not be long delayed,
    for the ship is already drawn into the water, and the crew is found."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="152" unit="line"/>Odysseus answered, "Laodamas, why do you taunt
    me in this way? My mind is set rather on cares than contests <term xml:lang="grc">athloi</term>; I have been through infinite trouble, and am
    come among you now as a suppliant, praying your king and <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> to further me on my return home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="158" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="158" unit="line"/>Then Euryalos reviled him outright and said, "I
    gather, then, that you are unskilled in any of the many sports <term xml:lang="grc">athloi</term> that men generally delight in. I suppose you
    are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships as captains or
    merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward freights and homeward
    cargoes. There does not seem to be much of the athlete [<term xml:lang="grc">athlêtês</term>] about you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="165" unit="line"/>"For shame, sir," answered Odysseus, fiercely,
    "you are an insolent man - so true is it that the gods do not grace all men
    alike in speech, person, and understanding. One man may be of weak presence,
    but heaven has adorned this with such a good conversation that he charms every
    one who sees him; his honeyed moderation [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>]
    carries his hearers with him so that he is leader in all assemblies of his
    fellows, and wherever he goes he is looked up to. Another may be as handsome as
    a god, but his good looks are not crowned with verbal grace [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>]. This is your case. No god could make a finer
    looking man than you are, but you are empty with respect to <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>. Your ill-judged remarks [contrary to <term xml:lang="grc">kosmos</term>] have made me exceedingly angry, for I excel in
    a great many athletic exercises [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>]; indeed,
    so long as I had youth and strength, I was among the first athletes of the age.
    Now, however, I am worn out by labor and sorrow, for I have gone through much
    both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea; still, in spite
    of all this I will compete [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], for your
    taunts have stung me to the quick."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="186" unit="line"/>So he hurried up without even taking his cloak
    off, and seized a disc, larger, more massive and much heavier than those used
    by the Phaeacians when disc-throwing among themselves. Then, swinging it back,
    he threw it from his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as he
    did so. The Phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as it sped
    gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>] that had been made yet. Athena, in the form of a man, came and
    marked the place where it had fallen. "A blind man, sir," said she, "could
    easily tell your mark [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>] by groping for it - it
    is so far ahead of any other. You may make your mind easy about this contest
    [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], for no Phaeacian can come near to such
    a throw as yours."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="199" unit="line"/>Odysseus was glad when he found he had a friend
    among the lookers-on, so he began to speak more pleasantly. "Young men," said
    he, "come up to that throw if you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy
    or even heavier. If anyone wants to have a bout with me let him come on, for I
    am exceedingly angry; I will box, wrestle, or run, I do not care what it is,
    with any man of you all except Laodamas, but not with him because I am his
    guest, and one cannot compete with one's own personal friend. At least I do not
    think it a prudent or a sensible thing for a guest to challenge his host's
    family at any game [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], especially when he is
    in a foreign <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>. He will cut the ground from
    under his own feet if he does; but I make no exception as regards any one else,
    for I want to have the matter out and know which is the best man. I am a good
    hand at every kind of athletic sport [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] known
    among humankind. I am an excellent archer. In battle I am always the first to
    bring a man down with my arrow, no matter how many more are taking aim at him
    alongside of me. Philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than I
    could when we Achaeans were before the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of the
    Trojans. I far excel every one else in the whole world, of those who still eat
    bread upon the face of the earth, but I should not like to shoot against the
    mighty dead, such as Herakles, or Eurytos the Cechalian- men who could shoot
    against the gods themselves. This in fact was how Eurytos came prematurely by
    his end, for Apollo was angry with him and killed him because he challenged him
    as an archer. I can throw a dart farther than any one else can shoot an arrow.
    Running is the only point in respect of which I am afraid some of the
    Phaeacians might beat me, for I have been brought down very low at sea; my
    provisions ran short, and therefore I am still weak."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="234" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="234" unit="line"/>They all held their peace except King Alkinoos,
    who began, "Sir, we have had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told
    us, from which I understand that you are willing to show your prowess [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>], as having been displeased with some insolent
    remarks that have been made to you by one of our athletes, and which could
    never have been uttered by any one who knows how to talk with propriety. I hope
    you will apprehend my meaning, and will explain to any one of your chief men
    who may be dining with yourself and your family when you get home, that we have
    an hereditary aptitude [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>] for accomplishments
    of all kinds. We are not particularly remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as
    wrestlers, but we are singularly fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We
    are extremely fond of good dinners, music, and dancing [<term xml:lang="grc">khoros</term>]; we also like frequent changes of linen, warm baths, and
    good beds; so now, please, some of you who are the best dancers set about
    dancing, that our guest on his return home may be able to tell his friends how
    much we surpass all other nations as sailors, runners, dancers, minstrels.
    Demodokos has left his lyre at my house, so run some one or other of you and
    fetch it for him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="256" unit="line"/>On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre
    from the king's house, and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood
    forward. It was their business to manage everything connected with the sports,
    so they made the ground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers [<term xml:lang="grc">khoros</term>]. Presently the servant came back with
    Demodokos’ lyre, and he took his place in the midst of them, whereon the best
    young dancers [<term xml:lang="grc">khoros</term>] in the town began to foot
    and trip it so nimbly that Odysseus was delighted with the merry twinkling of
    their feet.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="266" unit="line"/>Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of
    Ares and Aphrodite, and how they first began their intrigue in the house of
    Hephaistos. Ares made Aphrodite many presents, and defiled lord Hephaistos’
    marriage bed, so the sun, who saw what they were about, told Hephaistos.
    Hephaistos was very angry when he heard such dreadful news, so he went to his
    smithy brooding mischief, got his great anvil into its place, and began to
    forge some chains which none could either unloose or break, so that they might
    stay there in that place. When he had finished his snare he went into his
    bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs; he also
    let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. Not even a god could see
    them, so fine and subtle were they. As soon as he had spread the chains all
    over the bed, he made as though he were setting out for the fair state of
    <placeName key="tgn,7011173">Lemnos</placeName>, which of all places in the
    world was the one he was most fond of. But Ares kept no blind look out, and as
    soon as he saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with love for
    Aphrodite.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="289" unit="line"/>Now Aphrodite was just come in from a visit to
    her father Zeus, and was about sitting down when Ares came inside the house,
    and said as he took her hand in his own, "Let us go to the couch of Hephaistos:
    he is not at home, but is gone off to <placeName key="tgn,7011173">Lemnos</placeName> among the Sintians, whose speech is barbarous."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="295" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="295" unit="line"/>She was not unwilling, so they went to the
    couch to take their rest, whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning
    Hephaistos had spread for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot,
    but found too late that they were in a trap. Then Hephaistos came up to them,
    for he had turned back before reaching <placeName key="tgn,7011173">Lemnos</placeName>, when his scout the sun told him what was going on. He
    was in a furious passion, and stood in the vestibule making a dreadful noise as
    he shouted to all the gods.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="306" unit="line"/>"Father Zeus," he cried, "and all you other
    blessed gods who live for ever, come here and see the ridiculous and
    disgraceful sight that I will show you. Zeus’ daughter Aphrodite is always
    dishonoring me because I am lame. She is in love with Ares, who is handsome and
    clean built, whereas I am a cripple - but my parents are responsible [<term xml:lang="grc">aitioi</term>] for that, not I; they ought never to have
    begotten me. Come and see the pair together asleep on my bed. It makes me
    furious to look at them. They are very fond of one another, but I do not think
    they will lie there longer than they can help, nor do I think that they will
    sleep much; there, however, they shall stay till her father has repaid me the
    sum I gave him for his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="321" unit="line"/>On this the gods gathered to the house of
    Hephaistos. Earth-encircling Poseidon came, and Hermes the bringer of luck, and
    lord Apollo, but the goddesses stayed at home all of them for shame. Then the
    givers of all good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared
    with inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning Hephaistos had been,
    whereon one would turn towards his neighbor saying:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="329" unit="line"/>"Ill deeds do not bring <term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>, and the weak confound the strong. See how limping Hephaistos,
    lame as he is, has caught Ares who is the fleetest god in heaven; and now Ares
    will be cast in heavy damages."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="333" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="333" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse, but lord Apollo said to
    Hermes, "Messenger Hermes, giver of good things, you would not care how strong
    the chains were, would you, if you could sleep with Aphrodite?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="338" unit="line"/>"King Apollo," answered Hermes, "I only wish I
    might get the chance, though there were three times as many chains - and you
    might look on, all of you, gods and goddesses, but I would sleep with her if I
    could."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="343" unit="line"/>The immortal gods burst out laughing as they
    heard him, but Poseidon took it all seriously, and kept on imploring Hephaistos
    to set Ares free again. "Let him go," he cried, "and I will undertake, as you
    require, that he shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among
    the immortal gods."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="349" unit="line"/>"Do not," replied Hephaistos, "ask me to do
    this; a bad man's bond is bad security; what remedy could I enforce against you
    if Ares should go away and leave his debts behind him along with his
    chains?"</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="354" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="354" unit="line"/>"Hephaistos," said Poseidon, "if Ares goes away
    without paying his damages, I will pay you myself." So Hephaistos answered, "In
    this case I cannot and must not refuse you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="359" unit="line"/>Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them,
    and as soon as they were free they scampered off, Ares to <placeName key="tgn,7002756">Thrace</placeName> and laughter-loving Aphrodite to
    <placeName key="tgn,1000112">Cyprus</placeName> and to <placeName key="tgn,7002373">Paphos</placeName>, where is her grove and her altar
    fragrant with burnt offerings. Here the Graces bathed her, and anointed her
    with oil of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed
    her in raiment of the most enchanting beauty.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="367" unit="line"/>Thus sang the bard, and both Odysseus and the
    seafaring Phaeacians were charmed as they heard him.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="370" unit="line"/>Then Alkinoos told Laodamas and Halios to dance
    alone, for there was no one to compete with them. So they took a red ball which
    Polybos had made for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it
    up towards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground and caught it
    with ease before it came down again. When they had done throwing the ball
    straight up into the air they began to dance, and at the same time kept on
    throwing it backwards and forwards to one another, while all the young men in
    the ring applauded and made a great stamping with their feet. Then Odysseus
    said:</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="382" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="382" unit="line"/>"King Alkinoos, you said your people were the
    nimblest dancers in the world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so.
    I was astonished as I saw them."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="385" unit="line"/>The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed
    to the Phaeacians "Aldermen and town councilors, our guest seems to be a person
    of singular judgment; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he may
    reasonably expect. There are twelve chief men throughout the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, and counting myself there are thirteen;
    contribute, each of you, a clean cloak, a shirt, and a talent of fine gold; let
    us give him all this in a lump down at once, so that when he gets his supper he
    may do so with a light heart. As for Euryalos, he will have to make a formal
    apology and a present too, for he has been rude."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="398" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak. The others all of them
    applauded his saying, and sent their servants to fetch the presents. Then
    Euryalos said, "King Alkinoos, I will give the stranger all the satisfaction
    you require. He shall have sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which
    is of silver. I will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into which
    it fits. It will be worth a great deal to him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="406" unit="line"/>As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of
    Odysseus and said, "Good luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been
    said amiss may the winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a
    safe return, for I understand you have been long away from home, and have gone
    through much hardship."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="412" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="412" unit="line"/>To which Odysseus answered, "Good luck to you
    too my friend, and may the gods grant you every happiness [<term xml:lang="grc">olbos</term>]. I hope you will not miss the sword you have given me along
    with your apology."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="416" unit="line"/>With these words he girded the sword about his
    shoulders and towards sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as
    the servants of the donors kept bringing them to the house of King Alkinoos;
    here his sons received them, and placed them under their mother's charge. Then
    Alkinoos led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="424" unit="line"/>"Wife," said he, turning to Queen Arete, "Go,
    fetch the best chest we have, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set
    a copper on the fire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath; see
    also to the careful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians have made
    him; he will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that will
    follow. I shall myself give him this golden goblet - which is of exquisite
    workmanship - that he may be reminded of me for the rest of his life whenever
    he makes a drink-offering to Zeus, or to any of the gods."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="433" unit="line"/>Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod
    upon the fire as fast as they could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath
    water on to a clear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water
    became hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod. Meanwhile Arete
    brought a magnificent chest her own room, and inside it she packed all the
    beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the Phaeacians had brought. Lastly
    she added a cloak and a good shirt from Alkinoos, and said to Odysseus:</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="443" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="443" unit="line"/>"See to the lid yourself, and have the whole
    bound round at once, for fear any one should rob you by the way when you are
    asleep in your ship."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="446" unit="line"/>When Odysseus heard this he put the lid on the
    chest and made it fast with a bond that Circe had taught him. He had done so
    before an upper servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. He was
    very glad of a warm bath, for he had had no one to wait upon him ever since he
    left the house of Calypso, who as long as he remained with her had taken as
    good care of him as though he had been a god. When the servants had done
    washing and anointing him with oil, and had given him a clean cloak and shirt,
    he left the bath room and joined the guests who were sitting over their wine.
    Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the
    room, and admired him as she saw him pass. "Farewell stranger," said she, "do
    not forget me when you are safe at home again, for it is to me first that you
    owe a ransom for having saved your life."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="463" unit="line"/>And Odysseus said, "Nausicaa, daughter of great
    Alkinoos, may Zeus the mighty husband of Hera, grant that I may reach my home
    and see my day of <term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>; so shall I bless you as a
    goddess all my days, for it was you who saved me."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="469" unit="line"/>When he had said this, he seated himself beside
    Alkinoos. Supper was then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A
    servant led in the favorite bard Demodokos, and set him in the midst of the
    company, near one of the bearing-posts supporting the room, that he might lean
    against it. Then Odysseus cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty of fat (for
    there was abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant, "Take this piece
    of pork over to Demodokos and tell him to eat it; for all the pain his lays may
    cause me I will salute him none the less; bards get honor and respect [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>] throughout the world, for the Muse teaches them
    their songs and loves them."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="482" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="482" unit="line"/>The servant carried the pork in his fingers
    over to Demodokos, who took it and was very much pleased. They then laid their
    hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had
    enough to eat and drink, Odysseus said to Demodokos, "Demodokos, there is no
    one in the world whom I praise with admiration more than I do you. You must
    have studied under the Muse, Zeus’ daughter, and under Apollo, - with such a
    sense of order [<term xml:lang="grc">kosmos</term>] do you sing the return of
    the Achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures. If you were not there
    yourself, you must have heard it all from some one who was. Now, however,
    change your song and tell us of the construction [<term xml:lang="grc">kosmos</term>] of the wooden horse which Epeios made with the assistance of
    Athena, and which Odysseus got by stratagem into the fort of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> after freighting it with the men who
    afterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this tale aright I will tell all
    the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="499" unit="line"/>The bard, inspired by a god, lit up the picture
    of his story, starting at the point where some of the Argives set fire to their
    tents and sailed away while others, hidden within the horse, were waiting with
    Odysseus in the Trojan place of assembly. For the Trojans themselves had drawn
    the horse into their fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council
    round it, and were in three minds as to what they should do. Some were for
    breaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top of the
    rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the precipice; while yet
    others were for letting it remain as an offering and propitiation for the gods.
    And this was how they settled it in the end, for the city was doomed when it
    took in that horse, within which were all the bravest of the Argives waiting to
    bring death and destruction on the Trojans. Anon he sang how the sons of the
    Achaeans issued from the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from their
    ambuscade. He sang how they overran the city here and there and ravaged it, and
    how Odysseus went raging like Ares along with Menelaos to the house of
    Deiphobos. It was there that the fight raged most furiously, nevertheless by
    Athena's help he was victorious.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="521" unit="line"/>All this he told, but Odysseus was overcome as
    he heard him, and his cheeks were wet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when
    she throws herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own
    city and people, fighting bravely in defense of his home and children. She
    screams aloud and flings her arms about him as he lies gasping for breath and
    dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the back and shoulders, and
    carry her off into slavery, to a life of labor [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] and sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks - even so
    piteously did Odysseus weep, but none of those present perceived his tears
    except Alkinoos, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs
    that he was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="536" unit="line"/>"Aldermen and town councilors of the
    Phaeacians, let Demodokos cease his song, for there are those present who do
    not seem to like it. From the moment that we had done supper and Demodokos
    began to sing, our guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. He is
    evidently in great distress [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>], so let the
    bard leave off, that we may all enjoy ourselves, hosts and guest alike. This
    will be much more as it should be, for all these festivities, with the escort
    and the presents that we are making with so much good will, are wholly in his
    honor, and any one with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he
    ought to treat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:8"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="548" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="548" unit="line"/>"Therefore, sir, do you on your part affect no
    more concealment nor reserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will
    be more polite in you to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which your
    father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you were known
    among your neighbors and fellow-citizens. There is no one, neither rich nor
    poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, for people's fathers and
    mothers give them names as soon as they are born. Tell me also your country,
    nation <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, and city, that our ships may shape
    their purpose accordingly and take you there. For the Phaeacians have no
    pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of other nations have, but the
    ships themselves understand what it is that we are thinking about and want;
    they know all the cities and countries in the whole world, and can traverse the
    sea just as well even when it is covered with mist and cloud, so that there is
    no danger of being wrecked or coming to any harm. Still I do remember hearing
    my father say that Poseidon was angry with us for being too easy-going in the
    matter of giving people escorts. He said that one of these days he should wreck
    a ship of ours as it was returning from having escorted some one, and envelop
    our city with a high mountain. This is what the old man used to say, but
    whether the god will carry out his threat or no is a matter which he will
    decide for himself.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="572" unit="line"/>And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have
    you been wandering, and in what countries have you traveled? Tell us of the
    peoples themselves, and of their cities - who were hostile, savage and
    uncivilized [not <term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>], and who, on the other
    hand, hospitable and endowed with a god-fearing <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>. Tell us also why you are made unhappy on hearing about the
    return of the Argive Danaans from <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>. The gods arranged all this, and sent them their
    misfortunes in order that future generations might have something to sing
    about. Did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife's when you were before
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>? A son-in-law or
    father-in-law - which are the nearest relations a man has outside his own flesh
    and blood? Or was it some brave and kindly-natured comrade - for a good friend
    is as dear to a man as his own brother?" <milestone n="586" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

