+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered
    Dawn, appeared, Telemakhos rose and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to
    his comely feet, girded his sword about his shoulder, and left his room looking
    like an immortal god. He at once sent the criers round to call the people in
    assembly, so they called them and the people gathered thereon; then, when they
    were got together, he went to the place of assembly spear in hand - not alone,
    for his two hounds went with him. Athena endowed him with a presence of such
    divine comeliness [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>] that all marveled at him
    as he went by, and when he took his place in his father's seat even the oldest
    councilors made way for him.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="15" unit="line"/>Aigyptios, a man bent double with age, and of
    infinite experience, was the first to speak His son Antiphos had gone with
    Odysseus to <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>, land of noble
    steeds, but the savage <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> had
    killed him when they were all shut up in the cave, and had cooked his last
    dinner for him. He had three sons left, of whom two still worked on their
    father's land, while the third, Eurynomos, was one of the suitors; nevertheless
    their father could not get over the loss of Antiphos, and was still weeping for
    him when he began his speech.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="25" unit="line"/>"Men of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>," he said, "hear my words. From the day Odysseus left us
    there has been no meeting of our councilors until now; who then can it be,
    whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us? Has he got wind
    of some host approaching, and does he wish to warn us, or would he speak upon
    some other matter of public moment? I am sure he is an excellent person, and I
    hope Zeus will grant him his heart's desire."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="35" unit="line"/>Telemakhos took this speech as of good omen and
    rose at once, for he was bursting with what he had to say. He stood in the
    middle of the assembly and the good herald Pisenor brought him his staff. Then,
    turning to Aigyptios, "Sir," said he, "it is I, as you will shortly learn, who
    have convened you, for it is I who am the most aggrieved. I have not got wind
    of any host approaching about which I would warn you, nor is there any matter
    of public moment on which I would speak. My grievance is purely personal, and
    turns on two great misfortunes which have fallen upon my house. The first of
    these is the loss of my excellent father, who was chief among all you here
    present, and was like a father to every one of you; the second is much more
    serious, and ere long will be the utter ruin of my estate. The sons of all the
    chief men among you are pestering my mother to marry them against her will.
    They are afraid to go to her father Ikarios, asking him to choose the one he
    likes best, and to provide marriage gifts for his daughter, but day by day they
    keep hanging about my father's house, sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fat
    goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a thought to the quantity
    of wine they drink. No estate can stand such recklessness; we have now no
    Odysseus to ward off harm from our doors, and I cannot hold my own against
    them. I shall never all my days be as good a man as he was, still I would
    indeed defend myself if I had power to do so, for I cannot stand such treatment
    any longer; my house is being disgraced and ruined. Have respect, therefore, to
    your own consciences and to public opinion. Fear, too, the wrath [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>] of the gods, lest they should be displeased and
    turn upon you. I pray you by Zeus and Themis, who is the beginning and the end
    of councils, [do not] hold back, my friends, and leave me singlehanded - unless
    it be that my brave father Odysseus did some wrong to the Achaeans which you
    would now avenge on me, by aiding and abetting these suitors. Moreover, if I am
    to be eaten out of house and home at all, I had rather you did the eating
    yourselves, for I could then take action against you to some purpose, and serve
    you with notices from house to house till I got paid in full, whereas now I
    have no remedy."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="80" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="80" unit="line"/>With this Telemakhos dashed his staff to the
    ground and burst into tears. Every one was very sorry for him, but they all sat
    still and no one ventured to make him an angry answer, save only Antinoos, who
    spoke thus:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="85" unit="line"/>"Telemakhos, insolent braggart that you are, how
    dare you try to throw the blame upon us suitors? We are not the ones who are
    responsible [<term xml:lang="grc">aitioi</term>] but your mother is, for she
    knows many kinds of <term xml:lang="grc">kerdos</term>. This three years past,
    and close on four, she has been driving us out of our minds, by encouraging
    each one of us, and sending him messages that say one thing but her <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term> means other things. And then there was that other
    trick she played us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room, and began to
    work on an enormous piece of fine fabric. ‘Sweet hearts,’ said she, ‘Odysseus
    is indeed dead, still do not press me to marry again immediately, wait - for I
    would not have skill in weaving perish unrecorded - till I have completed a
    shroud for the hero <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, to be
    in readiness against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and
    the women of the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> will talk if he is laid out
    without a shroud.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="103" unit="line"/>"This was what she said, and we assented;
    whereon we could see her working on her great web all day long, but at night
    she would unpick the stitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way
    for three years and we never found her out, but as time [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>] wore on and she was now in her fourth year, one of her maids
    who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act of undoing
    her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no. The suitors,
    therefore, make you this answer, that both you and the Achaeans may understand
    - ‘Send your mother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of her
    father's choice’; for I do not know what will happen if she goes on plaguing us
    much longer with the airs she gives herself on the score of the accomplishments
    Athena has taught her, and because she knows so many kinds of <term xml:lang="grc">kerdos</term>. We never yet heard of such a woman; we know
    all about Tyro, Alkmene, Mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were
    nothing to your mother, any one of them. It was not fair of her to treat us in
    that way, and as long as she continues in the mind [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] with which heaven has now endowed her, so long shall we go on
    eating up your estate; and I do not see why she should change, for she gets all
    the honor and glory [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>], and it is you who pay
    for it, not she. Understand, then, that we will not go back to our lands,
    neither here nor elsewhere, till she has made her choice and married some one
    or other of us."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="129" unit="line"/>Telemakhos answered, "Antinoos, how can I drive
    the mother who bore me from my father's house? My father is abroad and we do
    not know whether he is alive or dead. It will be hard on me if I have to pay
    Ikarios the large sum which I must give him if I insist on sending his daughter
    back to him. Not only will he deal rigorously with me, but some <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> will also punish me; for my mother when she
    leaves the house will call on the Erinyes to avenge her; besides, it will
    result in <term xml:lang="grc">nemesis</term> for me among men, and I will have
    nothing to say to it. If you choose to take offense at this, leave the house
    and feast elsewhere at one another's houses at your own cost turn and turn
    about. If, on the other hand, you elect to persist in sponging upon one man,
    heaven help me, but Zeus shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my
    father's house there shall be no man to avenge you."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="146" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="146" unit="line"/>As he spoke Zeus sent two eagles from the top
    of the mountain, and they flew on and on with the wind, sailing side by side in
    their own lordly flight. When they were right over the middle of the assembly
    they wheeled and circled about, beating the air with their wings and glaring
    death into the eyes of them that were below; then, fighting fiercely and
    tearing at one another, they flew off towards the right over the town. The
    people wondered as they saw them, and asked each other what an this might be;
    whereon Halitherses, who was the best seer and reader of omens among them,
    spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="161" unit="line"/>"Hear me, men of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, and I speak more particularly to the suitors, for I see
    mischief brewing for them. Odysseus is not going to be away much longer; indeed
    he is close at hand to deal out death and destruction, not on them alone, but
    on many another of us who live in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>. Let us then be wise in time, and put a stop to this
    wickedness before he comes. Let the suitors do so of their own accord; it will
    be better for them, for I am not prophesying without due knowledge; everything
    has happened to Odysseus as I foretold when the Argives set out for <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and he with them. I said that after
    going through much hardship and losing all his men he should come home again in
    the twentieth year and that no one would know him; and now all this is coming
    true."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="177" unit="line"/>Eurymakhos son of Polybos then said, "Go home,
    old man, and prophesy to your own children, or it may be worse for them. I can
    read these omens myself much better than you can; birds are always flying about
    in the sunshine somewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything. Odysseus has
    died in a far country, and it is a pity you are not dead along with him,
    instead of prating here about omens and adding fuel to the anger of Telemakhos
    which is fierce enough as it is. I suppose you think he will give you something
    for your family, but I tell you - and it shall surely be - when an old man like
    you, who should know better, talks a young one over till he becomes
    troublesome, in the first place his young friend will only fare so much the
    worse - he will take nothing by it, for the suitors will prevent this - and in
    the next, we will lay a heavier fine, sir, upon yourself than you will at all
    like paying, for it will bear hardly upon you. As for Telemakhos, I warn him in
    the presence of you all to send his mother back to her father, who will find
    her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts so dear a daughter
    may expect. Till then we shall go on harassing him with our suit; for we fear
    no man, and care neither for him, with all his fine speeches, nor for any
    fortune-telling of yours. You may preach as much as you please, but we shall
    only hate you the more. We shall go back and continue to eat up Telemakhos'
    estate without paying him, till such time as his mother leaves off tormenting
    us by keeping us day after day on the tiptoe of expectation, each vying with
    the other in his suit for a prize of such rare perfection [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>]. Besides we cannot go after the other women whom we should
    marry in due course, but for the way in which she treats us."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="208" unit="line"/>Then Telemakhos said, "Eurymakhos, and you
    other suitors, I shall say no more, and entreat you no further, for the gods
    and the people of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> now know my
    story. Give me, then, a ship and a crew of twenty men to take me hither and
    thither, and I will go to <placeName key="perseus,Sparta">Sparta</placeName>
    and to <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> to inquire about the
    <term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term> of my father who has so long been
    missing. Some one may tell me something, or (and people often hear <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> in this way) some heaven-sent message may direct
    me. If I can hear of him as alive and achieving his homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] I will put up with the waste you suitors will
    make for yet another twelve months. If on the other hand I hear of his death, I
    will return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a
    grave marker [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>] to his memory, and make my
    mother marry again."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="224" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="224" unit="line"/>With these words he sat down, and Mentor who
    had been a friend of Odysseus, and had been left in charge of everything with
    full authority over the servants, rose to speak. He, then, plainly and in all
    honesty addressed them thus:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="229" unit="line"/>"Hear me, men of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, I hope that you may never have a kind and well-disposed
    ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; I hope that all your
    chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, for there is not one of you but
    has forgotten Odysseus, who ruled you as though he were your father. I am not
    half so angry with the suitors, for if they choose to do violence in the
    naughtiness of their minds [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>], and wager their
    heads that Odysseus will not return, they can take the high hand and eat up his
    estate, but as for you others I am shocked at the way in which you the rest of
    the population [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] all sit still without even
    trying to stop such scandalous goings on - which you could do if you chose, for
    you are many and they are few."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="242" unit="line"/>Leiokritos, son of Euenor, answered him saying,
    "Mentor, what folly is all this, that you should set the people to stay us? It
    is a hard thing for one man to fight with many about his victuals. Even though
    Odysseus himself were to set upon us while we are feasting in his house, and do
    his best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so very badly, would have
    small cause for rejoicing, and his blood would be upon his own head if he
    fought against such great odds. There is no sense in what you have been saying.
    Now, therefore, do you people go about your business, and let his father's old
    friends, Mentor and Halitherses, speed this boy on his journey, if he goes at
    all - which I do not think he will, for he is more likely to stay where he is
    till some one comes and tells him something."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="257" unit="line"/>On this he broke up the assembly, and every man
    went back to his own abode, while the suitors returned to the house of
    Odysseus.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="260" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="260" unit="line"/>Then Telemakhos went all alone by the sea side,
    washed his hands in the gray waves, and prayed to Athena.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="262" unit="line"/>"Hear me," he cried, "you god who visited me
    yesterday, and bade me sail the seas in search of the <term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term> of my father who has so long been missing. I would obey you,
    but the Achaeans, and more particularly the wicked suitors, are hindering me
    that I cannot do so."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="267" unit="line"/>As he thus prayed, Athena came close up to him
    in the likeness and with the voice of Mentor. "Telemakhos," said she, "if you
    are made of the same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor coward
    henceforward, for Odysseus never broke his word nor left his work half done.
    If, then, you take after him, your voyage will not be fruitless, but unless you
    have the blood of Odysseus and of Penelope in your veins I see no likelihood of
    your succeeding. Sons are seldom as good men as their fathers; they are
    generally worse, not better; still, as you are not going to be either fool or
    coward henceforward, and are not entirely without some share of your father's
    wise discernment, I look with hope upon your undertaking. But mind you never
    make common cause [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] with any of those foolish
    suitors, for they are neither sensible nor just [<term xml:lang="grc">dikaioi</term>], and give no thought to death and to the doom that will
    shortly fall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on the same day.
    As for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your father was such an old
    friend of mine that I will find you a ship, and will come with you myself. Now,
    however, return home, and go about among the suitors; begin getting provisions
    ready for your voyage; see everything well stowed, the wine in jars, and the
    barley meal, which is the staff of life, in leathern bags, while I go round the
    <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> and round up volunteers at once. There are
    many ships in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> both old and new;
    I will run my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we will get her
    ready and will put out to sea without delay."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="296" unit="line"/>Thus spoke Athena daughter of Zeus, and
    Telemakhos lost no time in doing as the goddess told him. He went moodily and
    found the suitors flaying goats and singeing pigs in the outer court. Antinoos
    came up to him at once and laughed as he took his hand in his own, saying,
    "Telemakhos, my fine fire-eater, bear no more ill blood neither in word nor
    deed, but eat and drink with us as you used to do. The Achaeans will find you
    in everything - a ship and a picked crew to boot - so that you can set sail for
    <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> at once and get news of
    your noble father."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="309" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="309" unit="line"/>"Antinoos," answered Telemakhos, "I cannot eat
    in peace, nor take pleasure of any kind with such men as you are. Was it not
    enough that you should waste so much good property of mine while I was yet a
    boy? Now that I am older and know more about it, I am also stronger, and
    whether here among this people [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>], or by going
    to <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>, I will do you all the harm
    I can. I shall go, and my going will not be in vain though, thanks to you
    suitors, I have neither ship nor crew of my own, and must be passenger not
    leader."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="321" unit="line"/>As he spoke he snatched his hand from that of
    Antinoos. Meanwhile the others went on getting dinner ready about the
    buildings, jeering at him tauntingly as they did so.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="325" unit="line"/>"Telemakhos," said one youngster, "means to be
    the death of us; I suppose he thinks he can bring friends to help him from
    <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>, or again from <placeName key="perseus,Sparta">Sparta</placeName>, where he seems bent on going. Or
    will he go to <placeName key="perseus,Ephyra">Ephyra</placeName> as well, for
    poison to put in our wine and kill us?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="331" unit="line"/>Another said, "Perhaps if Telemakhos goes on
    board ship, he will be like his father and perish far from his friends. In this
    case we should have plenty to do, for we could then divide up his property
    amongst us: as for the house we can let his mother and the man who marries her
    have that."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="337" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="337" unit="line"/>This was how they talked. But Telemakhos went
    down into the lofty and spacious store-room where his father's treasure of gold
    and bronze lay heaped up upon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes
    were kept in open chests. Here, too, there was a store of fragrant olive oil,
    while casks of old, well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for a god to drink,
    were ranged against the wall in case Odysseus should come home again after all.
    The room was closed with well-made doors opening in the middle; moreover the
    faithful old house-keeper Eurykleia, daughter of Ops the son of Pisenor, was in
    charge of everything both night and day. Telemakhos called her to the
    store-room and said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="349" unit="line"/>"Nurse, draw me off some of the best wine you
    have, after what you are keeping for my father's own drinking, in case, poor
    man, he should escape death, and find his way home again after all. Let me have
    twelve jars, and see that they all have lids; also fill me some well-sewn
    leathern bags with barley meal - about twenty measures in all. Get these things
    put together at once, and say nothing about it. I will take everything away
    this evening as soon as my mother has gone upstairs for the night. I am going
    to <placeName key="perseus,Sparta">Sparta</placeName> and to <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> to see if I can hear anything about
    the <term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term> of my dear father.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="361" unit="line"/>When Eurykleia heard this she began to cry, and
    spoke fondly to him, saying, "My dear child, what ever can have put such notion
    as that into your head? Where in the world do you want to go to - you, who are
    the one hope of the house? Your poor father is dead and gone in some foreign
    country [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] nobody knows where, and as soon as
    your back is turned these wicked ones here will be scheming to get you put out
    of the way, and will share all your possessions among themselves; stay where
    you are among your own people, and do not go wandering and worrying your life
    out on the barren ocean."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="371" unit="line"/>"Fear not, nurse," answered Telemakhos, "my
    scheme is not without heaven's sanction; but swear that you will say nothing
    about all this to my mother, till I have been away some ten or twelve days,
    unless she hears of my having gone, and asks you; for I do not want her to
    spoil her beauty by crying."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="377" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="377" unit="line"/>The old woman swore most solemnly that she
    would not, and when she had completed her oath, she began drawing off the wine
    into jars, and getting the barley meal into the bags, while Telemakhos went
    back to the suitors.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="382" unit="line"/>Then Athena bethought her of another matter.
    She took his shape, and went round the town to each one of the crew, telling
    them to meet at the ship by sundown. She went also to Noemon son of Phronios,
    and asked him to let her have a ship - which he was very ready to do. When the
    sun had set and darkness was over all the land, she got the ship into the
    water, put all the tackle on board her that ships generally carry, and
    stationed her at the end of the harbor. Presently the crew came up, and the
    goddess spoke encouragingly to each of them.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="393" unit="line"/>Furthermore she went to the house of Odysseus,
    and threw the suitors into a deep slumber. She caused their drink to fuddle
    them, and made them drop their cups from their hands, so that instead of
    sitting over their wine, they went back into the town to sleep, with their eyes
    heavy and full of drowsiness. Then she took the form and voice of Mentor, and
    called Telemakhos to come outside.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="402" unit="line"/>"Telemakhos," said she, "the men are on board
    and at their oars, waiting for you to give your orders, so make haste and let
    us be off."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="405" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="405" unit="line"/>On this she led the way, while Telemakhos
    followed in her steps. When they got to the ship they found the crew waiting by
    the water side, and Telemakhos said, "Now my men, help me to get the stores on
    board; they are all put together in the room, and my mother does not know
    anything about it, nor any of the maid servants except one."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="413" unit="line"/>With these words he led the way and the others
    followed after. When they had brought the things as he told them, Telemakhos
    went on board, Athena going before him and taking her seat in the stern of the
    vessel, while Telemakhos sat beside her. Then the men loosed the hawsers and
    took their places on the benches. Athena sent them a fair wind from the West,
    that whistled over the seething deep waves whereon Telemakhos told them to
    catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and they did as he told them. They set
    the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it, and made it fast with the
    forestays; then they hoisted their white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox
    hide. As the sail bellied out with the wind, the ship flew through the seething
    deep water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. Then they
    made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing-bowls to the brim, and
    made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from everlasting, but more
    particularly to the gray-eyed daughter of Zeus.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="434" unit="line"/>Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through
    the watches of the night from dark till dawn.</p>
    </div>

