+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>But as the sun was rising from the fair sea into
    the firmament of heaven to shed light on mortals and immortals, they reached
    <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> the city of Neleus. Now the
    people of <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> were gathered on the
    sea shore to offer sacrifice of black bulls to Poseidon lord of the Earthquake.
    There were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there were nine bulls
    to each guild. As they were eating the inward meats and burning the thigh bones
    [on the embers] in the name of Poseidon, Telemakhos and his crew arrived,
    furled their sails, brought their ship to anchor, and went ashore.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="12" unit="line"/>Athena led the way and Telemakhos followed her.
    Presently she said, "Telemakhos, you must not at all feel <term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term> or be nervous; you have taken this voyage to try and find out
    where your father is buried and how he came by his end; so go straight up to
    Nestor that we may see what he has got to tell us. Beg of him to speak the
    truth, and he will tell no lies, for he is an excellent person."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="21" unit="line"/>"But how, Mentor," replied Telemakhos, "dare I
    go up to Nestor, and how am I to address him? I have never yet been used to
    holding long conversations with people, and feel <term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term> about questioning one who is so much older than myself."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="25" unit="line"/>"Some things, Telemakhos," answered Athena,
    "will be suggested to you by your own instinct, and some <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> will prompt you further; for I am assured that the gods have
    been with you from the time of your birth until now."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="29" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="29" unit="line"/>She then went quickly on, and Telemakhos
    followed in her steps till they reached the place where the guilds of the
    Pylian people were assembled. There they found Nestor sitting with his sons,
    while his company round him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces
    of meat on to the spits while other pieces were cooking. When they saw the
    strangers they crowded round them, took them by the hand and bade them take
    their places. Nestor's son Peisistratos at once offered his hand to each of
    them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that were lying on the sands near
    his father and his brother Thrasymedes. Then he gave them their portions of the
    inward meats and poured wine for them into a golden cup, handing it to Athena
    first, and saluting her at the same time.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="43" unit="line"/>"Offer a prayer, sir," said he, "to lord
    Poseidon, for it is his feast that you are joining; when you have duly prayed
    and made your drink-offering, pass the cup to your friend that he may do so
    also. I doubt not that he too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live
    without gods in the world. Still, he is younger than you are, and is much of an
    age with myself, so I will give you the precedence."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="51" unit="line"/>As he spoke he handed her the cup. Athena
    thought that he was just [<term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>] and right to
    have given it to herself first; she accordingly began praying heartily to
    Poseidon. "O you," she cried, "who encircle the earth, deign to grant the
    prayers of your servants that call upon you. More especially we pray you send
    down your grace on Nestor and on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the
    Pylian people some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offering
    you. Lastly, grant Telemakhos and myself a happy issue, in respect of the
    matter that has brought us in our to <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="62" unit="line"/>When she had thus made an end of praying, she
    handed the cup to Telemakhos and he prayed likewise. By and by, when the outer
    meats were roasted and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man
    his portion and they all made an excellent dinner. As soon as they had had
    enough to eat and drink, Nestor, horseman of Gerene, began to speak.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="69" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="69" unit="line"/>"Now," said he, "that our guests have done their
    dinner, it will be best to ask them who they are. Who, then, sir strangers, are
    you, and from what port have you sailed? Are you traders? Or do you sail the
    seas as rovers with your hand against every man, and every man's hand against
    you?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="75" unit="line"/>Telemakhos answered boldly, for Athena had given
    him courage to ask about his father and get himself a good name [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>].</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="79" unit="line"/>"Nestor," said he, "son of Neleus, honor to the
    Achaean name, you ask whence we come, and I will tell you. We come from
    <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> under Neritum, and the
    matter about which I would speak is of private not public import. I seek news
    [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] of my unhappy father Odysseus, who is
    said to have sacked the town of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>
    in company with yourself. We know what fate befell each one of the other heroes
    who fought at <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, but as regards
    Odysseus heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even that he is dead at all,
    for no one can certify us in what place he perished, nor say whether he fell in
    battle on the mainland, or was lost at sea amid the waves of Amphitrite.
    Therefore I am suppliant at your knees, if haply you may be pleased to tell me
    of his melancholy end, whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from
    some other traveler, for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out
    of any pity for me, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw. If my
    brave father Odysseus ever did you loyal service, either by word or deed, when
    you Achaeans were harassed at the district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>]
    of the Trojans, bear it in mind now as in my favor and tell me truly all."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="102" unit="line"/>"My friend," answered Nestor, "you recall a
    time of much sorrow to my mind, for the brave Achaeans suffered much both at
    sea, while privateering under Achilles, and in that district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] when fighting before the great city of king
    Priam. Our best men all of them fell there - Ajax, Achilles, Patroklos peer of
    gods in counsel, and my own dear son Antilokhos, a man singularly fleet of foot
    and in fight valiant. But we suffered much more than this; what mortal tongue
    indeed could tell the whole story? Though you were to stay here and question me
    for five years, or even six, I could not tell you all that the Achaeans
    suffered, and you would turn homeward weary of my tale before it ended. Nine
    long years did we try every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was
    against us; during all this time there was no one who could compare with your
    father in subtlety - if indeed you are his son. I can hardly believe my eyes -
    and you talk just like him too - no one would say that people of such different
    ages could speak so much alike. He and I never had any kind of difference from
    first to last neither in camp nor council, but in singleness of heart and
    purpose [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] we advised the Argives how all might
    be ordered for the best.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="130" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="130" unit="line"/>"When however, we had sacked the city of Priam,
    and were setting sail in our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Zeus saw
    fit to vex the Argives on their homeward voyage [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]; for they had not all been either wise or just [<term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>], and hence many came to a bad end through the
    displeasure [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>] of Zeus' daughter Athena, who
    brought about a quarrel between the two sons of Atreus.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="137" unit="line"/>"The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was
    not according to <term xml:lang="grc">kosmos</term>, for it was sunset and the
    Achaeans were heavy with wine. When they explained why they had called the
    people together, it seemed that Menelaos was for sailing homeward [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] at once, and this displeased Agamemnon, who
    thought that we should wait till we had offered hecatombs to appease the anger
    of Athena. Fool that he was, he might have known that he would not prevail with
    her, for when the gods have made up their minds [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] they do not change them lightly. So the two stood bandying
    hard words, whereon the Achaeans sprang to their feet with a cry that rent the
    air, and were of two minds as to what they should do.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="151" unit="line"/>"That night we rested and nursed our anger, for
    Zeus was hatching mischief against us. But in the morning some of us drew our
    ships into the water and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest,
    about half in number, stayed behind with Agamemnon. We - the other half -
    embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven had smoothed the sea.
    When we reached <placeName key="perseus,Tenedos">Tenedos</placeName> we offered
    sacrifices to the gods, for we were longing to get home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]; cruel Zeus, however, did not yet mean that we should do so,
    and raised a second quarrel in the course of which some among us turned their
    ships back again, and sailed away under Odysseus to make their peace with
    Agamemnon; but I, and all the ships that were with me pressed forward, for I
    saw that mischief was brewing. The son of Tydeus went on also with me, and his
    crews with him. Later on Menelaos joined us at <placeName key="tgn,7002672">Lesbos</placeName>, and found us making up our minds about our course - for
    we did not know whether to go outside <placeName key="tgn,7002670">Chios</placeName> by the island of Psyra, keeping this to our left, or
    inside <placeName key="tgn,7002670">Chios</placeName>, over against the stormy
    headland of Mimas. So we asked heaven [<term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term>] for
    a sign, and were shown one to the effect that we should be soonest out of
    danger if we headed our ships across the open sea to <placeName key="tgn,7002677">Euboea</placeName>. This we therefore did, and a fair wind
    sprang up which gave us a quick passage during the night to <placeName key="perseus,Geraistos">Geraistos</placeName>, where we offered many
    sacrifices to Poseidon for having helped us so far on our way. Four days later
    Diomedes and his men stationed their ships in <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>, but I held on for <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>, and the wind never fell light from the day when heaven
    first made it fair for me.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="184" unit="line"/>"Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned
    without hearing anything about the others. I know neither who got home safely
    nor who were lost but, as in duty bound, I will give you without reserve the
    reports that have reached me since I have been here in my own house. They say
    the Myrmidons returned home safely under Achilles' son Neoptolemos; so also did
    the valiant son of Poias, Philoctetes. Idomeneus, again, lost no men at sea,
    and all his followers who escaped death in the field got safe home with him to
    <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName>. No matter how far out of the
    world you live, you will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad end he came to at
    the hands of Aigisthos - and a fearful reckoning did Aigisthos presently pay.
    See what a good thing it is for a man to leave a son behind him to do as
    Orestes did, who killed false Aigisthos the murderer of his noble father. You
    too, then - for you are a tall, smart-looking young man - show your mettle and
    make yourself a name in story."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="201" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="201" unit="line"/>"Nestor son of Neleus," answered Telemakhos,
    "honor to the Achaean name, the Achaeans will bear the <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> of Orestes in song even to future generations, for he has
    avenged his father nobly. Would that heaven might grant me to do like vengeance
    on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who are ill treating me and plotting my
    ruin; but the gods have no such happiness [<term xml:lang="grc">olbos</term>]
    in store for me and for my father, so we must bear it as best we may."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="210" unit="line"/>"My friend," said Nestor, "now that you remind
    me, I remember to have heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill
    disposed towards you and are making havoc of your estate. Do you submit to this
    tamely, or are the people of the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, following
    the voice of a god, against you? Who knows but that Odysseus may come back
    after all, and pay these scoundrels in full, either single-handed or with a
    force of Achaeans behind him? If Athena were to take as great a liking to you
    as she did to Odysseus when we were fighting in the Trojan <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos </term> (for I never yet saw the gods so openly fond of any one as
    Athena then was of your father), if she would take as good care of you as she
    did of him, these wooers would soon some of them forget their wooing."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="225" unit="line"/>Telemakhos answered, "I can expect nothing of
    the kind; it would be far too much to hope for. I dare not let myself think of
    it. Even though the gods themselves willed it no such good fortune could befall
    me."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="229" unit="line"/>On this Athena said, "Telemakhos, what are you
    talking about? Heaven has a long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it
    were me, I should not care how much I suffered before getting home, provided I
    could be safe when I was once there. I would rather this, than get home
    quickly, and then be killed in my own house as Agamemnon was by the treachery
    of Aigisthos and his wife. Still, death is certain, and when a man's hour is
    come, not even the gods can save him, no matter how fond they are of him."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="240" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="240" unit="line"/>"Mentor," answered Telemakhos, "do not let us
    talk about it any more. There is no chance of my father's ever coming back
    [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]; the gods have long since counseled his
    destruction. There is something else, however, about which I should like to ask
    Nestor, for he knows much more than any one else does. They say he has reigned
    for three generations so that it is like talking to an immortal. Tell me,
    therefore, Nestor, and tell me true [<term xml:lang="grc">alêthês</term>]; how
    did Agamemnon come to die in that way? What was Menelaos doing? And how came
    false Aigisthos to kill so far better a man than himself? Was Menelaos away
    from Achaean Argos, voyaging elsewhere among humankind, that Aigisthos took
    heart and killed Agamemnon?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="254" unit="line"/>"I will tell you truly [<term xml:lang="grc">alêthês</term>]," answered Nestor, "and indeed you have yourself divined
    how it all happened. If Menelaos when he got back from <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> had found Aigisthos still alive in his
    house, there would have been no grave marker heaped up for him, not even when
    he was dead, but he would have been thrown outside the city to dogs and
    vultures, and not a woman would have mourned him, for he had done a deed of
    great wickedness; but we were over there, fighting hard [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] at <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and
    Aigisthos who was taking his ease quietly in the heart of <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>, cajoled Agamemnon's wife Clytemnestra
    with incessant flattery.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="265" unit="line"/>"At first she would have nothing to do with his
    wicked scheme, for she was of a good natural disposition; moreover there was a
    singer with her, to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, that he was to keep guard
    over his wife; but when heaven had counseled her destruction, Aigisthos led
    this bard off to a desert island and left him there for crows and seagulls to
    batten upon - after which she went willingly enough to the house of Aigisthos.
    Then he offered many burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples
    with tapestries and gilding, for he had succeeded far beyond his
    expectations.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="276" unit="line"/>"Meanwhile Menelaos and I were on our way home
    from <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, on good terms with one
    another. When we got to <placeName key="perseus,Sounion">Sounion</placeName>,
    which is the point of <placeName key="perseus,Athens">Athens</placeName>,
    Apollo with his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman of Menelaos' ship
    (and never man knew better how to handle a vessel in rough weather) so that he
    died then and there with the helm in his hand, and Menelaos, though very
    anxious to press forward, had to wait in order to bury his comrade and give him
    his due funeral rites. Presently, when he too could put to sea again, and had
    sailed on as far as the Malean heads, Zeus counseled evil against him and made
    it blow hard till the waves ran mountains high. Here he divided his fleet and
    took the one half towards <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName> where
    the Cydonians dwell round about the waters of the river Iardanos. There is a
    high headland hereabouts stretching out into the sea from a place called
    <placeName key="perseus,Gortyn">Gortyn</placeName>, and all along this part
    of the coast as far as <placeName key="perseus,Phaistos">Phaistos</placeName>
    the sea runs high when there is a south wind blowing, but past <placeName key="perseus,Phaistos">Phaistos</placeName> the coast is more protected, for
    a small headland can make a great shelter. Here this part of the fleet was
    driven on to the rocks and wrecked; but the crews just managed to save
    themselves. As for the other five ships, they were taken by winds and seas to
    <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>, where Menelaos gathered much
    gold and substance among people of an alien speech. Meanwhile Aigisthos here at
    home plotted his evil deed. For seven years after he had killed Agamemnon he
    ruled in <placeName key="perseus,Mycenae">Mycenae</placeName>, and the people
    were obedient under him, but in the eighth year Orestes came back from
    <placeName key="perseus,Athens">Athens</placeName> to be his bane, and
    killed the murderer of his father. Then he celebrated the funeral rites of his
    mother and of false Aigisthos by a banquet to the people of <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>, and on that very day Menelaos came
    home, with as much treasure as his ships could carry.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="313" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="313" unit="line"/>"Take my advice then, and do not go traveling
    about for long so far from home, nor leave your property with such dangerous
    people in your house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you
    will have been on a fool's errand. Still, I should advise you by all means to
    go and visit Menelaos, who has lately come off a voyage among such distant
    peoples as no man could ever hope to get back from, when the winds had once
    carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birds cannot fly the distance in
    a twelvemonth, so vast and terrible are the seas that they must cross. Go to
    him, therefore, by sea, and take your own men with you; or if you would rather
    travel by land you can have a chariot, you can have horses, and here are my
    sons who can escort you to <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName>
    where Menelaos lives. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will tell you no
    lies, for he is an excellent person."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="329" unit="line"/>As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark,
    whereon Athena said, "Sir, all that you have said is well; now, however, order
    the tongues of the victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make
    drink-offerings to Poseidon, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for
    it is bed time [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>]. People should go away early
    and not keep late hours at a religious festival."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="337" unit="line"/>Thus spoke the daughter of Zeus, and they
    obeyed her saying. Men servants poured water over the hands of the guests,
    while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round
    after giving every man his drink-offering; then they threw the tongues of the
    victims into the fire, and stood up to make their drink-offerings. When they
    had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded, Athena
    and Telemakhos were for going on board their ship, but Nestor caught them up at
    once and stayed them.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="346" unit="line"/>"Heaven and the immortal gods," he exclaimed,
    "forbid that you should leave my house to go on board of a ship. Do you think I
    am so poor and short of clothes, or that I have so few cloaks and as to be
    unable to find comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? Let me tell
    you I have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the son of my
    old friend Odysseus to camp down on the deck of a ship - not while I live - nor
    yet will my sons after me, but they will keep open house as I have done."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="356" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="356" unit="line"/>Then Athena answered, "Sir, you have spoken
    well, and it will be much better that Telemakhos should do as you have said;
    he, therefore, shall return with you and sleep at your house, but I must go
    back to give orders to my crew, and keep them in good heart. I am the only
    older person among them; the rest are all young men of Telemakhos' own age, who
    have taken this voyage out of friendship; so I must return to the ship and
    sleep there. Moreover tomorrow I must go to the Cauconians where I have a large
    sum of wealth long owed to me. As for Telemakhos, now that he is your guest,
    send him to <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName> in a chariot,
    and let one of your sons go with him. Be pleased also to provide him with your
    best and fleetest horses."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="371" unit="line"/>When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the
    form of an eagle, and all marveled as they beheld it. Nestor was astonished,
    and took Telemakhos by the hand. "My friend," said he, "I see that you are
    going to be a great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while you
    are still so young. This can have been none other of those who dwell in heaven
    than Zeus' redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, who showed such favor towards
    your brave father among the Argives." "Holy queen," he continued, "agree to
    send down noble <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> upon myself, my good wife,
    and my children. In return, I will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer
    of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the yoke. I will
    gild her horns, and will offer her up to you in sacrifice."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="385" unit="line"/>Thus did he pray, and Athena heard his prayer.
    He then led the way to his own house, followed by his sons and sons-in-law.
    When they had got there and had taken their places on the benches and seats, he
    mixed them a bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when the housekeeper
    took the lid off the jar that held it. As he mixed the wine, he prayed much and
    made drink-offerings to Athena, daughter of Aegis-bearing Zeus. Then, when they
    had made their drink-offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the
    others went home to bed each in his own abode; but Nestor put Telemakhos to
    sleep in the room that was over the gateway along with Peisistratos, who was
    the only unmarried son now left him. As for himself, he slept in an inner room
    of the house, with the queen his wife by his side.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="404" unit="line"/>Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered
    Dawn, appeared, Nestor left his couch and took his seat on the benches of white
    and polished marble that stood in front of his house. Here aforetime sat
    Neleus, peer of gods in counsel, but he was now dead, and had gone to the house
    of Hades; so Nestor sat in his seat, scepter in hand, as guardian of the public
    weal. His sons as they left their rooms gathered round him, Echephron,
    Stratios, Perseus, Aretos, and Thrasymedes; the sixth son was Peisistratos, and
    when Telemakhos joined them they made him sit with them. Nestor then addressed
    them.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="418" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="418" unit="line"/>"My sons," said he, "make haste to do as I
    shall bid you. I wish first and foremost to propitiate the great goddess
    Athena, who manifested herself visibly to me during yesterday's festivities.
    Go, then, one or other of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a
    heifer, and come on here with it at once. Another must go to Telemakhos' ship,
    and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel. Some one
    else will run and fetch Laerceus the goldsmith to gild the horns of the heifer.
    The rest, stay all of you where you are; tell the maids in the house to prepare
    an excellent dinner, and to fetch seats, and logs of wood for a burnt offering.
    Tell them also to bring me some clear spring water."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="430" unit="line"/>On this they hurried off on their several
    errands. The heifer was brought in from the plain, and Telemakhos' crew came
    from the ship; the goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which
    he worked his gold, and Athena herself came to the sacrifice. Nestor gave out
    the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heifer that the goddess might
    have pleasure in their beauty. Then Stratios and Echephron brought her in by
    the horns; Aretos fetched water from the house in a ewer that had a flower
    pattern on it, and in his other hand he held a basket of barley meal; sturdy
    Thrasymedes stood by with a sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while
    Perseus held a bucket. Then Nestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling
    the barley meal, and he offered many a prayer to Athena as he threw a lock from
    the heifer's head upon the fire.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="447" unit="line"/>When they had done praying and sprinkling the
    barley meal Thrasymedes dealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with a
    stroke that cut through the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the
    daughters and daughters-in-law of Nestor, and his venerable wife Eurydice (she
    was eldest daughter to Klymenos) screamed with delight. Then they lifted the
    heifer's head from off the ground, and Peisistratos cut her throat. When she
    had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut her up. They cut out the thigh
    bones all in due course, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some
    pieces of raw meat on the top of them; then Nestor laid them upon the wood fire
    and poured wine over them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged
    spits in their hands. When the thighs were burned and they had tasted the
    inward meats, they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces on the
    spits and toasted them over the fire.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="464" unit="line"/>Meanwhile lovely Polykaste, Nestor's youngest
    daughter, washed Telemakhos. When she had washed him and anointed him with oil,
    she brought him a fair mantle and shirt, and he looked like a god as he came
    from the bath and took his seat by the side of Nestor. When the outer meats
    were done they drew them off the spits and sat down to dinner where they were
    waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept pouring them out their wine in
    cups of gold. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Nestor said,
    "Sons, put Telemakhos' horses to the chariot that he may start at once."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:3"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="477" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="477" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had
    said, and yoked the fleet horses to the chariot. The housekeeper packed them up
    a provision of bread, wine, and sweetmeats fit for the sons of princes. Then
    Telemakhos got into the chariot, while Peisistratos gathered up the reins and
    took his seat beside him. He lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing
    loath into the open country, leaving the high citadel of <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> behind them. All that day did they
    travel, swaying the yoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness
    was over all the land. Then they reached <placeName key="perseus,Pherai">Pherai</placeName> where Diokles lived, who was son to Ortilokhos and
    grandson to Alpheus. Here they passed the night and Diokles entertained them
    hospitably. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn; appeared, they again
    yoked their horses and drove out through the gateway under the echoing
    gatehouse. Peisistratos lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing
    loath; presently they came to the wheat lands of the open country, and in the
    course of time completed their journey, so well did their steeds take them.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="497" unit="line"/>Now when the sun had set and darkness was over
    the land,</p>
    </div>

