+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Meanwhile Odysseus and the swineherd had lit a
    fire in the hut and were getting breakfast ready at daybreak for they had sent
    the men out with the pigs. When Telemakhos came up, the dogs did not bark, but
    fawned upon him, so Odysseus, hearing the sound of feet and noticing that the
    dogs did not bark, said to Eumaios:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="8" unit="line"/>"Eumaios, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your
    men or some one of your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning
    upon him and not barking."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="11" unit="line"/>The words were hardly out of his mouth before
    his son stood at the door. Eumaios sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which
    he was mixing wine fell from his hands, as he made towards his master. He
    kissed his head and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could
    not be more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old age,
    after ten years’ absence in a foreign country and after having gone through
    much hardship. He embraced him, kissed him all over as though he had come back
    from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="23" unit="line"/>"So you are come, Telemakhos, light of my eyes
    that you are. When I heard you had gone to <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> I made sure I was never going to see you any more. Come
    in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good look at you now you are
    home again; it is not very often you come into the country to see us herdsmen;
    you stick pretty close to the town generally. I suppose you think it better to
    keep an eye on what the suitors are doing."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="30" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="30" unit="line"/>"So be it, old friend," answered Telemakhos,
    "but I am come now because I want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is
    still at her old home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed
    of Odysseus is without bedding and covered with cobwebs."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="36" unit="line"/>"She is still at the house," replied Eumaios,
    "grieving and breaking her heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and
    day continually."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="40" unit="line"/>As spoke he took Telemakhos’ spear, whereon he
    crossed the stone threshold and came inside. Odysseus rose from his seat to
    give him place as he entered, but Telemakhos checked him; "Sit down, stranger."
    said he, "I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay it
    for me."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="46" unit="line"/>Odysseus went back to his own place, and Eumaios
    strewed some green brushwood on the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it
    for Telemakhos to sit upon. Then the swineherd brought them platters of cold
    meat, the remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he filled the
    bread baskets with bread as fast as he could. He mixed wine also in bowls of
    ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Odysseus. Then they laid their hands on the
    good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had enough to eat
    and drink Telemakhos said to Eumaios, "Old friend, where does this stranger
    come from? How did his crew bring him to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, and who were they?-for assuredly he did not come here
    by land"’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="60" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="60" unit="line"/>To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaios, "My
    son, I will tell you the real truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêthês</term>]. He
    says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great traveler. At this moment he
    is running away from a Thesprotian ship, and has refuge at my station, so I
    will put him into your hands. Do whatever you like with him, only remember that
    he is your suppliant."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="68" unit="line"/>"I am very much distressed," said Telemakhos,
    "by what you have just told me. How can I take this stranger into my house? I
    am as yet young, and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me.
    My mother cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look after
    the house out of respect for public [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] opinion
    and the memory of her husband, or whether the time is now come for her to take
    the best man of those who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the
    most advantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station I will
    find him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and sandals, and will
    send him wherever he wants to go. Or if you like you can keep him here at the
    station, and I will send him clothes and food that he may be no burden on you
    and on your men; but I will not have him go near the suitors, for they are very
    insolent [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>], and are sure to ill-treat him in
    a way that would greatly grieve [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] me; no
    matter how valiant a man may be he can do nothing against numbers, for they
    will be too strong for him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="90" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus said, "Sir, it is right that I
    should say something myself. I am much shocked about what you have said about
    the insolent way in which the suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as
    you are. Tell me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or do the people of
    your <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, following the voice of some god, hate
    [<term xml:lang="grc">ekhthros</term>] you? May you not complain of your
    brothers - for it is to these that a man may look for support, however great
    his quarrel may be? I wish I were as young as you are and in my present mind;
    if I were son to Odysseus, or, indeed, Odysseus himself, I would rather some
    one came and cut my head off, but I would go to the house and be the bane of
    every one of these men. If they were too many for me - I being single-handed -
    I would rather die fighting in my own house than see such disgraceful sights
    day after day, strangers grossly maltreated, and men dragging the women
    servants about the house in an unseemly way, wine drawn recklessly, and bread
    wasted all to no purpose for an end that shall never be accomplished."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="112" unit="line"/>And Telemakhos answered, "I will tell you truly
    everything. There is no enmity between me and my <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, nor can I complain of brothers, to whom a man may look for
    support however great his quarrel may be. Zeus has made us a race of only sons.
    <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName> was the only son of
    Arceisius, and Odysseus only son of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>. I am myself the only son of Odysseus who left me
    behind him when he went away, so that I have never been of any use to him.
    Hence it comes that my house is in the hands of numberless marauders; for the
    chiefs from all the neighboring islands, Dulichium, Same, <placeName key="tgn,7011374">Zacynthus</placeName>, as also all the principal men of
    <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> itself, are eating up my
    house under the pretext of paying court to my mother, who will neither say
    point blank that she will not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, so they
    are making havoc of my estate, and before long will do so with myself into the
    bargain. The issue, however, rests with heaven. But do you, old friend Eumaios,
    go at once and tell Penelope that I am safe and have returned from <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>. Tell it to herself alone, and then
    come back here without letting any one else know, for there are many who are
    plotting mischief against me."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="135" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="135" unit="line"/>"I understand and heed you," replied Eumaios;
    "you need instruct me no further, only I am going that way say whether I had
    not better let poor <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName> know
    that you are returned. He used to superintend the work on his farm in spite of
    his bitter sorrow about Odysseus, and he would eat and drink at will along with
    his servants; but they tell me that from the day on which you set out for
    <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> he has neither eaten nor
    drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his farm, but sits weeping and
    wasting the flesh from off his bones."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="146" unit="line"/>"More's the pity," answered Telemakhos, "I am
    sorry for him, but we must leave him to himself just now. If people could have
    everything their own way, the first thing I should choose would be the return
    of my father; but go, and give your message; then make haste back again, and do
    not turn out of your way to tell <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>. Tell my mother to send one of her women secretly with
    the news at once, and let him hear it from her."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="154" unit="line"/>Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaios,
    therefore, took his sandals, bound them to his feet, and started for the town.
    Athena watched him well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of
    a woman - fair, stately, and wise. She stood against the side of the entry, and
    revealed herself to Odysseus, but Telemakhos could not see her, and knew not
    that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seen by everybody.
    Odysseus saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did not bark, but went scared
    and whining off to the other side of the yards. She nodded her head and
    motioned to Odysseus with her eyebrows; whereon he left the hut and stood
    before her outside the main wall of the yards. Then she said to him:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="167" unit="line"/>"Odysseus, noble son of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, it is now time for you to tell
    your son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the
    destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. I will not be long in
    joining you, for I too am eager for the fray."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="172" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="172" unit="line"/>As she spoke she touched him with her golden
    wand. First she threw a fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then
    she made him younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his
    color, filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. Then she
    went away and Odysseus came back inside the hut. His son was astounded when he
    saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear he might be looking upon a god.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="181" unit="line"/>"Stranger," said he, "how suddenly you have
    changed from what you were a moment or two ago. You are dressed differently and
    your color is not the same. Are you some one or other of the gods that live in
    heaven? If so, be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice and
    offerings of wrought gold. Have mercy upon me."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="186" unit="line"/>And Odysseus said, "I am no god, why should you
    take me for one? I am your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so
    much at the hands of violent [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] men."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="190" unit="line"/>As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell
    from his cheek on to the ground, for he had restrained all tears till now. but
    Telemakhos could not yet believe that it was his father, and said:</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="194" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="194" unit="line"/>"You are not my father, but some <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> is flattering me with vain hopes that I may
    grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself contrive with his
    <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term> to do as you have been doing, and make
    yourself old and young at a moment's notice, unless a god were with him. A
    second ago you were old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come
    down from heaven."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="201" unit="line"/>Odysseus answered, "Telemakhos, you ought not
    to be so immeasurably astonished at my being really here. There is no other
    Odysseus who will come hereafter. Such as I am, it is I, who after long
    wandering and much hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own
    country. What you wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess Athena, who
    does with me whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases. At one moment
    she makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a young man with good clothes on
    my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live in heaven to make any man
    look either rich or poor."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="213" unit="line"/>As he spoke he sat down, and Telemakhos threw
    his arms about his father and wept. They were both so much moved that they
    cried aloud like eagles or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed
    of their half fledged young by peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and the
    sun would have gone down upon their mourning if Telemakhos had not suddenly
    said, "In what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring you to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>? Of what nation did they declare
    themselves to be - for you cannot have come by land?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="226" unit="line"/>"I will tell you the truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêtheia</term>], my son," replied Odysseus. "It was the
    Phaeacians who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in the habit of
    giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They took me over the sea
    while I was fast asleep, and landed me in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, after giving me many presents in bronze, gold, and
    raiment. These things by heaven's mercy are lying concealed in a cave, and I am
    now come here on the suggestion of Athena that we may consult about killing our
    enemies. First, therefore, give me a list of the suitors, with their number,
    that I may learn who, and how many, they are. I can then turn the matter over
    in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the whole body of them ourselves,
    or whether we must find others to help us."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="240" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="240" unit="line"/>To this Telemakhos answered, "Father, I have
    always heard of your renown [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] both in the
    field and in council, but the task you talk of is a very great one: I am awed
    at the mere thought of it; two men cannot stand against many and brave ones.
    There are not ten suitors only, nor twice ten, but ten many times over; you
    shall learn their number at once. There are fifty-two chosen [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>] youths from Dulichium, and they have six
    servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty young Achaeans from
    <placeName key="tgn,7011374">Zacynthus</placeName>, and twelve from
    <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> itself, all of them well
    born. They have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men who can carve at
    table. If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to rue your
    coming, and your violent revenge [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>]. See whether
    you cannot think of some one who would be willing to come and help us."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="257" unit="line"/>"Listen to me," replied Odysseus, "and think
    whether Athena and her father Zeus may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try
    and find some one else as well."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="262" unit="line"/>"Those whom you have named," answered
    Telemakhos, "are a couple of good allies, for though they dwell high up among
    the clouds they have power over both gods and men."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="266" unit="line"/>"These two," continued Odysseus, "will not keep
    long out of the fray, when the suitors and we join fight in my house. Now,
    therefore, return home early tomorrow morning, and go about among the suitors
    as before. Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a
    miserable old beggar. If you see them ill-treating me, steel your heart against
    my sufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out of the house, or
    throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently trying to make them
    behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to you, for the day of their
    reckoning is at hand. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, when
    Athena shall put it in my mind, I will nod my head to you, and on seeing me do
    this you must collect all the armor that is in the house and hide it in the
    strong store room. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are
    removing it; say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke,
    inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Odysseus went away, but has become
    soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that you are
    afraid Zeus may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that they may do
    each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight
    of arms sometimes tempts people to use them. But leave a sword and a spear
    apiece for yourself and me, and a couple oxhide shields so that we can snatch
    them up at any moment; Zeus and Athena will then soon quiet these people. There
    is also another matter; if you are indeed my son and my blood runs in your
    veins, let no one know that Odysseus is within the house - neither <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, nor yet the swineherd, nor any of
    the servants, nor even Penelope herself. Let you and me make trial the women
    alone, and let us also make trial of some other of the men servants, to see who
    is on our side and whose hand is against us."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="308" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="308" unit="line"/>"Father," replied Telemakhos, "you will come to
    know me by and by, and when you do you will find that I can keep your counsel.
    I do not think, however, the plan you propose will be a gain [<term xml:lang="grc">kerdos</term>] for either of us. Think it over. It will take
    us a long time to go the round of the farms and exploit the men, and all the
    time the suitors will be wasting your estate with impunity and without
    compunction. Prove the women by all means, to see who are disloyal and who
    guiltless, but I am not in favor of going round and trying the men. We can
    attend to that later on, if you really have some sign from Zeus that he will
    support you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="321" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship
    which had brought Telemakhos and his crew from <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> had reached the town of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>. When they had come inside the harbor they drew the ship
    on to the land; their servants came and took their armor from them, and they
    left all the presents at the house of Klytios. Then they sent a servant to tell
    Penelope that Telemakhos had gone into the country, but had sent the ship to
    the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy. This servant and
    Eumaios happened to meet when they were both on the same errand of going to
    tell Penelope. When they reached the House, the servant stood up and said to
    the queen in the presence of the waiting women, "Your son, my lady, is now
    returned from <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>"; but Eumaios
    went close up to Penelope, and said privately that her son had given bidden him
    tell her. When he had given his message he left the house with its outbuildings
    and went back to his pigs again.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="342" unit="line"/>The suitors were surprised and angry at what
    had happened, so they went outside the great wall that ran round the outer
    court, and held a council near the main entrance. Eurymakhos, son of Polybos,
    was the first to speak.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="346" unit="line"/>"My friends," said he, "this voyage of
    Telemakhos’ is a very serious matter; we had made sure that it would come to
    nothing. Now, however, let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew
    together to send after the others and tell them to come back as fast as they
    can."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="351" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="351" unit="line"/>He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomos
    turned in his place and saw the ship inside the harbor, with the crew lowering
    her sails, and putting by their oars; so he laughed, and said to the others,
    "We need not send them any message, for they are here. Some god must have told
    them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="358" unit="line"/>On this they rose and went to the water side.
    The crew then drew the ship on shore; their servants took their armor from
    them, and they went up in a body to the place of assembly, but they would not
    let any one old or young sit along with them, and Antinoos, son of Eupeithes,
    spoke first.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="364" unit="line"/>"Good heavens," said he, "see how the gods have
    saved this man from destruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the
    headlands all day long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to
    sleep, but waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing
    and killing him; but some <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> has conveyed him
    home in spite of us. Let us consider how we can make an end of him. He must not
    escape us; our affair is never likely to come off while is alive, for he is
    very shrewd in <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>, and public feeling is by no
    means all on our side. We must make haste before he can call the Achaeans in
    assembly; he will lose no time in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and
    will tell all the world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. The
    people will not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they
    do us no hurt, nor drive us from our own <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> into
    exile. Let us try and lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or
    on the road hither. Then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let his
    mother and the man who marries her have the house. If this does not please you,
    and you wish Telemakhos to live on and hold his father's property, then we must
    not gather here and eat up his goods in this way, but must make our offers to
    Penelope each from his own house, and she can marry the man who will give the
    most for her, and whose lot it is to win her."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="393" unit="line"/>They all held their peace until Amphinomos rose
    to speak. He was the son of Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was
    foremost among all the suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island
    of Dulichium; his conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope than
    that of any of the other for he was a man of good natural disposition. "My
    friends," said he, speaking to them plainly and in all honestly, "I am not in
    favor of killing Telemakhos. It is a heinous thing to kill one who is of noble
    blood. Let us first take counsel of the gods, and if the oracles of Zeus advise
    it, I will both help to kill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so;
    but if they dissuade us, I would have you hold your hands."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="406" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="406" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them
    well, so they rose forthwith and went to the house of Odysseus where they took
    their accustomed seats.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="409" unit="line"/>Then Penelope resolved that she would show
    herself to the outrageous [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>] suitors. She
    knew of the plot against Telemakhos, for the servant Medon had overheard their
    counsels and had told her; she went down therefore to the court attended by her
    maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing-posts
    supporting the roof of the room holding a veil before her face, and rebuked
    Antinoos saying:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="417" unit="line"/>"Antinoos, insolent [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>] and wicked schemer, they say you are the best speaker and
    counselor of any man your own age in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of
    <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, but you are nothing of the
    kind. Madman, why should you try to compass the death of Telemakhos, and take
    no heed of suppliants, whose witness is Zeus himself? It is not right for you
    to plot thus against one another. Do you not remember how your father fled to
    this house in fear of the people [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>], who were
    enraged against him for having gone with some Taphian pirates and plundered the
    Thesprotians who were at peace with us? They wanted to tear him in pieces and
    eat up everything he had, but Odysseus stayed their hands although they were
    infuriated, and now you devour his property without paying for it, and break my
    heart by wooing his wife and trying to kill his son. Leave off doing so, and
    stop the others also."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="434" unit="line"/>To this Eurymakhos son of Polybos answered,
    "Take heart, Queen Penelope daughter of Ikarios, and do not trouble yourself
    about these matters. The man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay
    hands upon your son Telemakhos, while I yet live to look upon the face of the
    earth. I say - and it shall surely be - that my spear shall be reddened with
    his blood; for many a time has Odysseus taken me on his knees, held wine up to
    my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands. Therefore Telemakhos is
    much the dearest friend I have, and has nothing to fear from the hands of us
    suitors. Of course, if death comes to him from the gods, he cannot escape it."
    He said this to quiet her, but in reality he was plotting against
    Telemakhos.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="449" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="449" unit="line"/>Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned
    her husband till Athena shed sleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaios got
    back to Odysseus and his son, who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old
    and were ready; helping one another to get supper ready; Athena therefore came
    up to Odysseus, turned him into an old man with a stroke of her wand, and clad
    him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd might recognize him
    and not keep the secret, but go and tell Penelope.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="460" unit="line"/>Telemakhos was the first to speak. "So you have
    got back, Eumaios," said he. "What is the news [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] of the town? Have the suitors returned, or are they still
    waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="464" unit="line"/>"I did not think of asking about that," replied
    Eumaios, "when I was in the town. I thought I would give my message and come
    back as soon as I could. I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to
    <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>, and he was the first to
    tell the new your mother, but I can say what I saw with my own eyes; I had just
    got on to the crest of the hill of Hermes above the town when I saw a ship
    coming into harbor with a number of men in her. They had many shields and
    spears, and I thought it was the suitors, but I cannot be sure."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="476" unit="line"/>On hearing this Telemakhos smiled to his
    father, but so that Eumaios could not see him.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:16"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="478" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="478" unit="line"/>Then, when they had finished their labor [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] and the meal was ready, they ate it, and every
    man had his full share so that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had
    enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.
    <milestone n="481" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

