+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace
    throughout the covered room, enthralled by the charm of his story, till
    presently Alkinoos began to speak.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="3" unit="line"/>"Odysseus," said he, "now that you have reached
    my house I doubt not you will get home without further misadventure no matter
    how much you have suffered in the past. To you others, however, who come here
    night after night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would
    insist as follows. Our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought gold,
    and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance; let us now,
    therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a large tripod and a
    cauldron. We will recoup ourselves by the levy of a general rate throughout the
    <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>; for private individuals cannot be
    expected to bear the burden of such a handsome present."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="16" unit="line"/>Every one approved of this, and then they went
    home to bed each in his own abode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered
    Dawn, appeared, they hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with
    them. Alkinoos went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under the
    ship's benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers. Then they
    went to the house of Alkinoos to get dinner, and he sacrificed a bull for them
    in honor of Zeus who is the lord of all. They set the meats to grill and made
    an excellent dinner, after which the inspired bard, Demodokos, who was a
    favorite with every one, sang to them; but Odysseus kept on turning his eyes
    towards the sun, as though to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on
    his way. As one who has been all day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of
    oxen keeps thinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that he may
    go and get it, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so did Odysseus
    rejoice when the sun went down, and he at once said to the Phaeacians,
    addressing himself more particularly to King Alkinoos:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="38" unit="line"/>"Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your
    drink-offerings and send me on my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my
    heart's desire by giving me an escort, and making me presents, which heaven
    grant that I may turn to good account [<term xml:lang="grc">olbios</term>]; may
    I find my admirable wife living in peace among friends, and may you whom I
    leave behind me give satisfaction to your wives and children; may heaven grant
    you every good grace [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>], and may no evil thing
    come among your people."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="47" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="47" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them
    approved his saying and agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he
    had spoken reasonably. Alkinoos therefore said to his servant, "Pontonoos, mix
    some wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer a prayer to father
    Zeus, and speed our guest upon his way."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="53" unit="line"/>Pontonoos mixed the wine and handed it to every
    one in turn; the others each from his own seat made a drink-offering to the
    blessed gods that live in heaven, but Odysseus rose and placed the double cup
    in the hands of queen Arete.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="59" unit="line"/>"Farewell, queen," said he, "henceforward and
    for ever, till age and death, the common lot of humankind, lay their hands upon
    you. I now take my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your
    people, and with king Alkinoos."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="63" unit="line"/>As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and
    Alkinoos sent a man to conduct him to his ship and to the sea shore. Arete also
    sent some maid servants with him - one with a clean shirt and cloak, another to
    carry his strong-box, and a third with grain and wine. When they got to the
    water side the crew took these things and put them on board, with all the meat
    and drink; but for Odysseus they spread a rug and a linen sheet on deck that he
    might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship. Then he too went on board and lay
    down without a word, but the crew took every man his place in order [<term xml:lang="grc">kosmos</term>] and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone
    to which it had been bound. Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea,
    Odysseus fell into a deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="81" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="81" unit="line"/>The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in
    hand chariot flies over the course when the horses feel the whip. Her prow
    curved as it were the neck of a stallion, and a great wave of dark seething
    water boiled in her wake. She held steadily on her course, and even a falcon,
    swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. Thus, then, she cut
    her way through the water. carrying one who was as cunning as the gods, but who
    was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of all that he had suffered both on the
    field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="93" unit="line"/>When the bright star that heralds the approach
    of dawn began to show. the ship drew near to land. Now there is in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of <placeName key="tgn,7013803">Ithaca</placeName> a haven of the Old One of the Sea, Phorkys, which lies
    between two points that break the line of the sea and shut the harbor in. These
    shelter it from the storms of wind and sea that rage outside, so that, when
    once within it, a ship may lie without being even moored. At the head of this
    harbor there is a large olive tree, and at no distance a fine overarching
    cavern sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads. There are mixing-bowls
    within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover, there are
    great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of sea purple - very
    curious to see - and at all times there is water within it. It has two
    entrances, one facing North by which mortals can go down into the cave, while
    the other comes from the South and is more mysterious; mortals cannot possibly
    get in by it, it is the way taken by the gods.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="113" unit="line"/>Into this harbor, then, they took their ship,
    for they knew the place, She had so much way upon her that she ran half her own
    length on to the shore; when, however, they had landed, the first thing they
    did was to lift Odysseus with his rug and linen sheet out of the ship, and lay
    him down upon the sand still fast asleep. Then they took out the presents which
    Athena had persuaded the Phaeacians to give him when he was setting out on his
    voyage homewards. They put these all together by the root of the olive tree,
    away from the road, for fear some passer by might come and steal them before
    Odysseus awoke; and then they made the best of their way home again.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="125" unit="line"/>But Poseidon did not forget the threats with
    which he had already threatened Odysseus, so he took counsel with Zeus. "Father
    Zeus," said he, "I shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you
    gods, if mortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show such
    small regard for me. I said I would get Odysseus home when he had suffered
    sufficiently. I did not say that he should never have a homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] at all, for I knew you had already nodded your
    head about it, and promised that he should do so; but now they have brought him
    over the sea in a ship fast asleep and have landed him in <placeName key="tgn,7013803">Ithaca</placeName> after loading him with more magnificent
    presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he would ever have brought back from
    <placeName key="tgn,7014164">Troy</placeName>, if he had had his share of
    the spoil and got home without misadventure."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="139" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="139" unit="line"/>And Zeus answered, "What, O Lord of the
    Earthquake, are you talking about? The gods are by no means wanting in respect
    for you. It would be monstrous were they to insult one so old and honored as
    you are. As regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence
    [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] and treating you disrespectfully, it will
    always rest with yourself to deal with him as you may think proper, so do just
    as you please."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="146" unit="line"/>"I should have done so at once," replied
    Poseidon, "if I were not anxious to avoid anything that might displease you;
    now, therefore, I should like to wreck the Phaeacian ship as it is returning
    from its escort. This will stop them from escorting people in future; and I
    should also like to envelop their city under a huge mountain."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="153" unit="line"/>"My good friend," answered Zeus, "I should
    recommend you at the very moment when the people from the city are watching the
    ship on her way, to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship.
    This will astonish everybody, and you can then envelop their city under the
    mountain."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="159" unit="line"/>When earth-encircling Poseidon heard this he
    went to <placeName key="tgn,7010886">Scheria</placeName> where the Phaeacians
    live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid way, had got
    close-in. Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, and drove it down with
    the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground. After this he went
    away.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="165" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="165" unit="line"/>The Phaeacians then began talking among
    themselves, and one would turn towards his neighbor, saying, "Who is it that
    can have rooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into port? We could
    see the whole of her only a moment ago."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="170" unit="line"/>This was how they talked, but they knew nothing
    about it; and Alkinoos said, "I remember now the old prophecy of my father. He
    said that Poseidon would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over
    the sea, and would one day wreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning from an
    escort, and envelop our city with a high mountain. This was what my old father
    used to say, and now it is all coming true. Now therefore let us all do as I
    say; in the first place we must leave off giving people escorts when they come
    here, and in the next let us sacrifice twelve picked [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] bulls to Poseidon that he may have mercy upon us, and not
    envelop our city with the high mountain." When the people heard this they were
    afraid and got ready the bulls.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="185" unit="line"/>Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of the Phaeacians to king Poseidon, standing
    round his altar; and at the same time Odysseus woke up once more upon his own
    soil. He had been so long away that he did not know it again; moreover, Zeus’
    daughter Athena had made it a foggy day, so that people might not know of his
    having come, and that she might tell him everything without either his wife or
    his fellow citizens and friends recognizing him until he had taken his revenge
    upon the wicked suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quite different to him -
    the long straight tracks, the harbors, the precipices, and the goodly trees,
    appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon his native land. So he
    smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and cried aloud despairingly.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="200" unit="line"/>"Alas," he exclaimed, "among what manner of
    people am I fallen? Are they savage and uncivilized [not <term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>] or hospitable and endowed with god-fearing <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>? Where shall I put all this treasure, and which
    way shall I go? I wish I had stayed over there with the Phaeacians; or I could
    have gone to some other great chief who would have been good to me and given me
    an escort. As it is I do not know where to put my treasure, and I cannot leave
    it here for fear somebody else should get hold of it. In good truth the chiefs
    and rulers of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly [<term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>] by me, and have left me in the wrong country; they said
    they would take me back to <placeName key="tgn,7013803">Ithaca</placeName> and
    they have not done so: may Zeus the protector of suppliants chastise them, for
    he watches over everybody and punishes those who do wrong. Still, I suppose I
    must count my goods and see if the crew have gone off with any of them."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="217" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="217" unit="line"/>He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons,
    his gold and all his clothes, but there was nothing missing; still he kept
    grieving about not being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the
    shore of the sounding sea bewailing his hard fate. Then Athena came up to him
    disguised as a young shepherd of delicate and princely mien, with a good cloak
    folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals on her comely feet and held
    a javelin in her hand. Odysseus was glad when he saw her, and went straight up
    to her.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="228" unit="line"/>"My friend," said he, "you are the first person
    whom I have met with in this country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to
    be well disposed in <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term> towards me. Protect these
    my goods, and myself too, for I embrace your knees and pray to you as though
    you were a god. Tell me, then, and tell me truly, what land and country [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] is this? Who are its inhabitants? Am I on an
    island, or is this the sea board of some continent?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="236" unit="line"/>Athena answered, "Stranger, you must be very
    simple, or must have come from somewhere a long way off, not to know what
    country this is. It is a very celebrated place, and everybody knows it East and
    West. It is rugged and not a good driving country, but it is by no means a bad
    island for what there is of it. It grows any quantity of grain and also wine,
    for it is watered both by rain and dew; it breeds cattle also and goats; all
    kinds of timber grow here, and there are watering places where the water never
    runs dry; so, sir, the name of <placeName key="tgn,7013803">Ithaca</placeName>
    is known even as far as <placeName key="tgn,7014164">Troy</placeName>, which I
    understand to be a long way off from this Achaean country."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="250" unit="line"/>Odysseus was glad at finding himself, as Athena
    told him, in his own country, and he began to answer, but he did not speak the
    truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêthês</term>], and made up a lying story in the
    instinctive wiliness of his <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="256" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="256" unit="line"/>"I heard of <placeName key="tgn,7013803">Ithaca</placeName>," said he, "when I was in <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName> beyond the seas, and now it seems I have reached it with
    all these treasures. I have left as much more behind me for my children, but am
    fleeing because I killed Orsilokhos son of Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in
    <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName>. I killed him because he
    wanted to rob me of the spoils I had got from <placeName key="tgn,7014164">Troy</placeName> with so much trouble and danger both on the field of
    battle and by the waves of the weary sea; he said I had not served his father
    loyally in the Trojan <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> as vassal, but had set
    myself up as an independent ruler, so I lay in wait for him and with one of my
    followers by the road side, and speared him as he was coming into town from the
    country. It was a very dark night and nobody saw us; it was not known,
    therefore, that I had killed him, but as soon as I had done so I went to a ship
    and besought the owners, who were Phoenicians, to take me on board and set me
    in <placeName key="tgn,7011036">Pylos</placeName> or in <placeName key="perseus,Elis">Elis</placeName> where the Epeans rule, giving them as
    much spoil as satisfied them. They meant no guile, but the wind drove them off
    their course, and we sailed on till we came hither by night. It was all we
    could do to get inside the harbor, and none of us said a word about supper
    though we wanted it badly, but we all went on shore and lay down just as we
    were. I was very tired and fell asleep directly, so they took my goods out of
    the ship, and placed them beside me where I was lying upon the sand. Then they
    sailed away to Sidonia, and I was left here in great distress of mind."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="287" unit="line"/>Such was his story, but Athena smiled and
    caressed him with her hand. Then she took the form of a woman, fair, stately,
    and wise, "He must be indeed a shifty and deceitful person," said she, "who
    could surpass you in all manner of craft [<term xml:lang="grc">kerdos</term>]
    even though you had a god for your antagonist. Daring that you are, full of
    guile, unwearying in deceit [<term xml:lang="grc">apatê</term>], can you not
    drop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now that you are in your
    own country again? We will say no more, however, about this, for we both of us
    know craftiness [<term xml:lang="grc">kerdos</term>] upon occasion - you are
    the best counselor and orator among all humankind, while I for diplomacy and
    crafty ways [<term xml:lang="grc">kerdea</term>] have fame [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] among the gods. Did you not know Zeus’ daughter
    Athena - me, who have been ever with you, who kept watch over you in all your
    ordeals [<term xml:lang="grc">ponoi</term>], and who made the Phaeacians take
    so great a liking to you? And now, again, I am come here to talk things over
    with you, and help you to hide the treasure I made the Phaeacians give you; I
    want to tell you about the troubles that await you in your own house; you have
    got to face them, but tell no one, neither man nor woman, that you have come
    home again. Bear everything, and put up with every man's violent insolence
    [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>], without a word."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="311" unit="line"/>And Odysseus answered, "A man, goddess, may
    know a great deal, but you are so constantly changing your appearance that when
    he meets you it is a hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not. This
    much, however, I know exceedingly well; you were very kind to me as long as we
    Achaeans were fighting before <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>,
    but from the day on which we went on board ship after having sacked the city of
    Priam, and heaven dispersed us - from that day, Athena, I saw no more of you,
    and cannot ever remember your coming to my ship to help me in a difficulty; I
    had to wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered me from evil and I
    reached the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of the Phaeacians, where you
    encouraged me and took me into the town. And now, I beseech you in your
    father's name, tell me the truth, for I do not believe I am really back in
    <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>. I am in some other country
    and you are mocking me and deceiving me in all you have been saying. Tell me
    then truly, have I really got back to my own country?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="329" unit="line"/>"You are always taking something of that sort
    into your head," replied Athena, "and that is why I cannot desert you in your
    afflictions; you are so plausible, shrewd and shifty. Any one but yourself on
    returning from so long a voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife
    and children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them or hearing
    any news about them till you have made trial of your wife, who remains at home
    vainly grieving for you, and having no peace night or day for the tears she
    sheds on your behalf. As for my not coming near you, I was never uneasy about
    you, for I was certain you would get back safely though you would lose all your
    men, and I did not wish to quarrel with my uncle Poseidon, who never forgave
    you for having blinded his son. I will now, however, point out to you the lie
    of the land, and you will then perhaps believe me. This is the haven of the Old
    One of the Sea, Phorkys, and here is the olive tree that grows at the head of
    it; [near it is the cave sacred to the Naiads;] here too is the overarching
    cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable hecatomb to the nymphs, and
    this is the wooded mountain Neritum."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="352" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="352" unit="line"/>As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and
    the land appeared. Then Odysseus rejoiced at finding himself again in his own
    land, and kissed the bounteous soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the
    nymphs, saying, "Naiad nymphs, daughters of Zeus, I made sure that I was never
    again to see you, now therefore I greet you with all loving salutations, and I
    will bring you offerings as in the old days, if Zeus’ redoubtable daughter will
    grant me life, and bring my son to manhood."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="362" unit="line"/>"Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about
    that," rejoined Athena, "let us rather set about stowing your things at once in
    the cave, where they will be quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage it
    all."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="366" unit="line"/>Therewith she went down into the cave to look
    for the safest hiding places, while Odysseus brought up all the treasure of
    gold, bronze, and good clothing which the Phaeacians had given him. They stowed
    everything carefully away, and Athena set a stone against the door of the cave.
    Then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and consulted how to
    compass the destruction of the wicked suitors.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="375" unit="line"/>"Odysseus," said Athena, "noble son of
    <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, think how you can lay
    hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in your house these
    three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents to her, while she
    does nothing but mourning your <term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>, giving hope
    and sending encouraging messages to every one of them, but meaning [in her
    <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] the very opposite of all she says."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="382" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="382" unit="line"/>And Odysseus answered, "In good truth, goddess,
    it seems I should have come to much the same bad end in my own house as
    Agamemnon did, if you had not given me such timely information. Advise me how I
    shall best avenge myself. Stand by my side and put your courage into my heart
    as on the day when we loosed <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>'s
    fair diadem from her brow. Help me now as you did then, and I will fight three
    hundred men, if you, goddess, will be with me."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="393" unit="line"/>"Trust me for that," said she, "I will not lose
    sight of you when once we set about it, and I would imagine that some of those
    who are devouring your substance will then bespatter the pavement with their
    blood and brains. I will begin by disguising you so that no human being shall
    know you; I will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your yellow
    hair; I will clothe you in a garment that shall fill all who see it with
    loathing; I will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you an unseemly object
    in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of the son whom you left behind
    you. Then go at once to the swineherd who is in charge of your pigs; he has
    been always well affected towards you, and is devoted to Penelope and your son;
    you will find him feeding his pigs near the rock that is called Raven by the
    fountain Arethusa, where they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after
    their manner. Stay with him and find out how things are going, while I proceed
    to <placeName key="perseus,Sparta">Sparta</placeName> and see your son, who is
    with Menelaos at <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName>, where he
    has gone to try and find a report [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] on
    whether you are still alive."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="416" unit="line"/>"But why," said Odysseus, "did you not tell
    him, for you knew all about it? Did you want him too to go sailing about amid
    all kinds of hardship while others are eating up his estate?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="420" unit="line"/>Athena answered, "Never mind about him, I sent
    him that he might be well spoken [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] of for
    having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>], but is staying quite comfortably with Menelaos, and is
    surrounded with abundance of every kind. The suitors have put out to sea and
    are lying in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before he can get home. I
    do not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who are now
    eating up your estate will first find a grave themselves."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:13"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="429" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="429" unit="line"/>As she spoke Athena touched him with her wand
    and covered him with wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the
    flesh over his whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine
    ones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of a wrap about him, and a
    tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gave him an
    undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him with a staff and a
    wallet all in holes, with a twisted thong for him to sling it over his
    shoulder.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="439" unit="line"/>When the pair had thus laid their plans they
    parted, and the goddess went straight to <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName> to fetch Telemakhos. <milestone n="440" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

