+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:7"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Thus, then, did Odysseus wait and pray; but the
    girl drove on to the town. When she reached her father's house she drew up at
    the gateway, and her brothers - comely as the gods - gathered round her, took
    the mules out of the wagon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she
    went to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedousa of Apeira, lit the fire
    for her. This old woman had been brought by sea from Apeira, and had been
    chosen as a prize for Alkinoos because he was king over the Phaeacians, and the
    people in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> obeyed him as though he were a
    god. She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, and
    brought her supper for her into her own room.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="14" unit="line"/>Presently Odysseus got up to go towards the
    town; and Athena shed a thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the
    proud Phaeacians who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was.
    Then, as he was just entering the town, she came towards him in the likeness of
    a little girl carrying a pitcher. She stood right in front of him, and Odysseus
    said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="22" unit="line"/>"My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the
    house of king Alkinoos? I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not
    know one in your town and country."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="27" unit="line"/>Then Athena said, "Yes, father stranger, I will
    show you the house you want, for Alkinoos lives quite close to my own father. I
    will go before you and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not
    look at any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abide
    strangers, and do not like men who come from some other place. They are a
    sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of Poseidon in ships that glide
    along like thought, or as a bird in the air."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:7"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="37" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="37" unit="line"/>On this she led the way, and Odysseus followed
    in her steps; but not one of the Phaeacians could see him as he passed through
    the city in the midst of them; for the great goddess Athena in her good will
    towards him had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness. He admired their
    harbors, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city, which,
    with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and when they reached the
    king's house Athena said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="48" unit="line"/>"This is the house, father stranger, which you
    would have me show you. You will find a number of great people sitting at
    table, but do not be afraid; go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more
    likely he is to carry his point, even though he is a stranger. First find the
    queen. Her name is Arete, and she comes of the same family as her husband
    Alkinoos. They both descend originally from Poseidon, who was father to
    Nausithoos by Periboia, a woman of great beauty. Periboia was the youngest
    daughter of Eurymedon, who at one time reigned over the giants, but he ruined
    his ill-fated people and lost his own life to boot.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="61" unit="line"/>"Poseidon, however, lay with his daughter, and
    she had a son by him, the great Nausithoos, who reigned over the Phaeacians.
    Nausithoos had two sons Rhexenor and Alkinoos; Apollo killed the first of them
    while he was still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughter
    Arete, whom Alkinoos married, and honors as no other woman is honored of all
    those that keep house along with their husbands.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="69" unit="line"/>"Thus she both was, and still is, respected
    beyond measure by her children, by Alkinoos himself, and by the whole people,
    who look upon her as a goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city,
    for she is a thoroughly good woman both in head [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] and heart, and when any women are friends of hers, she will
    help their husbands also to settle their disputes. If you can gain her good
    will, you may have every hope of seeing your friends again, and getting safely
    back to your home and country."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:7"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="78" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="78" unit="line"/>Then Athena left <placeName key="tgn,7010886">Scheria</placeName> and went away over the sea. She went to Marathon and to
    the spacious streets of <placeName key="perseus,Athens">Athens</placeName>,
    where she entered the abode of Erechtheus; but Odysseus went on to the house of
    Alkinoos, and he pondered much as he paused a while before reaching the
    threshold of bronze, for the splendor of the palace was like that of the sun or
    moon. The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the cornice
    was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hung on pillars of silver that
    rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was silver and the hook of the
    door was of gold.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="91" unit="line"/>On either side there stood gold and silver
    mastiffs which Hephaistos, with his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly
    to keep watch over the palace of king Alkinoos; so they were immortal and could
    never grow old. Seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one
    end to the other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of the
    house had made. Here the chief persons of the Phaeacians used to sit and eat
    and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there were golden
    figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands, raised on pedestals,
    to give light by night to those who were at table. There are fifty maid
    servants in the house, some of whom are always grinding rich yellow grain at
    the mill, while others work at the loom, or sit and spin, and their shuttles
    go, backwards and forwards like the fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen
    is so closely woven that it will turn oil. As the Phaeacians are the best
    sailors in the world, so their women excel all others in weaving, for Athena
    has taught them all manner of useful arts, and they are very intelligent.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="112" unit="line"/>Outside the gate of the outer court there is a
    large garden of about four acres with a wall all round it. It is full of
    beautiful trees - pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. There are
    luscious figs also, and olives in full growth. The fruits never rot nor fail
    all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so soft that a
    new crop ripens before the old has dropped. Pear grows on pear, apple on apple,
    and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for there is an excellent
    vineyard: on the level ground of a part of this, the grapes are being made into
    raisins; in another part they are being gathered; some are being trodden in the
    wine tubs, others further on have shed their blossom and are beginning to show
    fruit, others again are just changing color. In the furthest part of the ground
    there are beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year
    round. Two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughout the whole
    garden, while the other is carried under the ground of the outer court to the
    house itself, and the town's people draw water from it. Such, then, were the
    splendors with which the gods had endowed the house of king Alkinoos.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="133" unit="line"/>So here Odysseus stood for a while and looked
    about him, but when he had looked long enough he crossed the threshold and went
    within the precincts of the house. There he found all the chief people among
    the Phaeacians making their drink-offerings to Hermes, which they always did
    the last thing before going away for the night. He went straight through the
    court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness in which Athena had enveloped him,
    till he reached Arete and King Alkinoos; then he laid his hands upon the knees
    of the queen, and at that moment the miraculous darkness fell away from him and
    he became visible. Every one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man
    there, but Odysseus began at once with his petition.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:7"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="146" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="146" unit="line"/>"Queen Arete," he exclaimed, "daughter of great
    Rhexenor, in my distress I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your
    guests (whom may heaven prosper with long life and happiness [<term xml:lang="grc">olbos</term>], and may they leave their possessions to their
    children, and all the honors conferred upon them by the state [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>]) to help me home to my own country as soon as
    possible; for I have been long in trouble and away from my friends."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="153" unit="line"/>Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes
    and they all held their peace, till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an
    excellent speaker and an elder among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty
    addressed them thus:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="159" unit="line"/>"Alkinoos," said he, "it is not creditable to
    you that a stranger should be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth;
    every one is waiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise
    and take a seat on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix some
    wine and water that we may make a drink-offering to Zeus the lord of thunder,
    who takes all well-disposed suppliants under his protection; and let the
    housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever there may be in the house."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="167" unit="line"/>When Alkinoos heard this he took Odysseus by
    the hand, raised him from the hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas,
    who had been sitting beside him, and was his favorite son. A maid servant then
    brought him water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin
    for him to wash his hands, and she drew a clean table beside him; an upper
    servant brought him bread and offered him many good things of what there was in
    the house, and Odysseus ate and drank. Then Alkinoos said to one of the
    servants, "Pontonoos, mix a cup of wine and hand it round that we may make
    drink-offerings to Zeus the lord of thunder, who is the protector of all
    well-disposed suppliants."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:7"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="182" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="182" unit="line"/>Pontonoos then mixed wine and water, and handed
    it round after giving every man his drink-offering. When they had made their
    offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded, Alkinoos said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="186" unit="line"/>"Aldermen and town councilors of the
    Phaeacians, hear my words. You have had your supper, so now go home to bed.
    Tomorrow morning I shall invite a still larger number of aldermen, and will
    give a sacrificial banquet in honor of our guest; we can then discuss the
    question of his escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing
    to his own country without toil [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] or
    inconvenience to himself, no matter how distant it may be. We must see that he
    comes to no harm while on his homeward journey, but when he is once at home he
    will have to take the luck he was born with for better or worse like other
    people. It is possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who
    has come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods are departing
    from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made themselves perfectly
    clear to us when we have been offering them hecatombs. They come and sit at our
    feasts just like one of our selves, and if any solitary wayfarer happens to
    stumble upon some one or other of them, they affect no concealment, for we are
    as near of kin to the gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="207" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus said: "Pray, Alkinoos, do not
    take any such notion into your head. I have nothing of the immortal about me,
    neither in body nor mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most
    afflicted. Indeed, were I to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon
    me, you would say that I was still worse off than they are. Nevertheless, let
    me sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is a very importunate thing,
    and thrusts itself on a man's notice no matter how dire is his distress [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>]. I am in great distress [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>], yet it insists that I shall eat and drink, bids me lay
    aside all memory of my sorrows and dwell only on the due replenishing of
    itself. As for yourselves, do as you propose, and at break of day set about
    helping me to get home. I shall be content to die if I may first once more
    behold my property, my bondsmen, and all the greatness of my house."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="226" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak. Every one approved his
    saying, and agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken
    reasonably. Then when they had made their drink-offerings, and had drunk each
    as much as he was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode,
    leaving Odysseus in the room with Arete and Alkinoos while the servants were
    taking the things away after supper. Arete was the first to speak, for she
    recognized the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that Odysseus was wearing, as the
    work of herself and of her maids; so she said, "Stranger, before we go any
    further, there is a question I should like to ask you. Who, and whence are you,
    and who gave you those clothes? Did you not say you had come here from beyond
    the sea?"</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:7"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="240" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="240" unit="line"/>And Odysseus answered, "It would be a long
    story, Lady, were I to relate in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand
    of heaven has been laid heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is
    an island far away in the sea which is called ‘the Ogygian.’ Here dwells the
    cunning and powerful goddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas. She lives by herself
    far from all neighbors human or divine. A <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term>,
    however, led me to her hearth all desolate and alone, for Zeus struck my ship
    with his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. My brave comrades were
    drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel and was carried hither and
    thither for the space of nine days, till at last during the darkness of the
    tenth night the gods brought me to the Ogygian island where the great goddess
    Calypso lives. She took me in and treated me with the utmost kindness; indeed
    she wanted to make me immortal that I might never grow old, but she could not
    persuade me to let her do so.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="259" unit="line"/>"I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on
    end, and watered the good clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole
    time; but at last when the eighth year came round she bade me depart of her own
    free will, either because Zeus had told her she must, or because she had
    changed her mind [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>]. She sent me from her
    island on a raft, which she provisioned with abundance of bread and wine.
    Moreover she gave me good stout clothing, and sent me a wind that blew both
    warm and fair. Seventeen days did I sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth I
    caught sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast - and glad
    indeed was I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there was still much trouble
    in store for me, for at this point Poseidon would let me go no further, and
    raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terribly high that I could no
    longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under the fury of the gale, and I
    had to swim for it, till wind and current brought me to your shores.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="278" unit="line"/>"There I tried to land, but could not, for it
    was a bad place and the waves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to
    the sea and swam on till I came to a river that seemed the most likely landing
    place, for there were no rocks and it was sheltered from the wind. Here, then,
    I got out of the water and gathered my senses together again. Night was coming
    on, so I left the river, and went into a thicket, where I covered myself all
    over with leaves, and presently heaven sent me off into a very deep sleep. Sick
    and sorry as I was I slept among the leaves all night, and through the next day
    till afternoon, when I woke as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter's
    maid servants playing upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking like
    a goddess. I besought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent
    disposition, much more so than could be expected from so young a person - for
    young people are apt to be thoughtless. She gave me plenty of bread and wine,
    and when she had had me washed in the river she also gave me the clothes in
    which you see me. Now, therefore, though it has pained me to do so, I have told
    you the whole truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêtheia</term>]."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="298" unit="line"/>Then Alkinoos said, "Stranger, it was very
    wrong of my daughter not to bring you on at once to my house along with the
    maids, seeing that she was the first person whose aid you asked."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:7"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="302" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="302" unit="line"/>"Pray do not scold her," replied Odysseus; "she
    is not to blame. She did tell me to follow along with the maids, but I was
    ashamed and afraid, for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw
    me. Every human being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="308" unit="line"/>"Stranger," replied Alkinoos, "I am not the
    kind of man to get angry about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable;
    but by Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you
    are, and how much you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry my
    daughter, and become my son-in-law. If you will stay I will give you a house
    and an estate, but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here against your own
    wish, and that you may be sure of this I will attend tomorrow to the matter of
    your escort. You can sleep during the whole voyage if you like, and the men
    shall sail you over smooth waters either to your own home, or wherever you
    please, even though it be a long way further off than <placeName key="tgn,7002677">Euboea</placeName>, which those of my people who saw it
    when they took yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son of Gaia, tell
    me is the furthest of any place - and yet they did the whole voyage in a single
    day without distressing themselves, and came back again afterwards. You will
    thus see how much my ships excel all others, and what magnificent oarsmen my
    sailors are."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="329" unit="line"/>Then was Odysseus glad and prayed aloud saying,
    "Father Zeus, grant that Alkinoos may do all as he has said, for so he will win
    an imperishable <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> among humankind, and at the
    same time I shall return to my country."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="334" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her
    maids to set a bed in the room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good
    red rugs, and to spread coverlets on the top of them with woolen cloaks for
    Odysseus to wear. The maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and
    when they had made the bed they came up to Odysseus and said, "Rise, sir
    stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready," and glad indeed was he to go
    to his rest.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:7"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="344" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="344" unit="line"/>So Odysseus slept in a bed placed in a room
    over the echoing gateway; but Alkinoos lay in the inner part of the house, with
    the queen his wife by his side. <milestone n="347" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

