+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
    appeared, Telemakhos bound on his sandals and took a strong spear that suited
    his hands, for he wanted to go into the city. "Old friend," said he to the
    swineherd, "I will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she
    will never leave off grieving till she has seen me. As for this unfortunate
    stranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one who will give
    him a drink and a piece of bread. I have trouble enough of my own, and cannot
    be burdened with other people. If this makes him angry so much the worse for
    him, but I like to tell the truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêthês</term>]."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="16" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus said, "Sir, I do not want to stay
    here; a beggar can always do better in town than country, for any one who likes
    can give him something. I am too old to care about remaining here at the beck
    and call of a master. Therefore let this man do as you have just told him, and
    take me to the town as soon as I have had a warm by the fire, and the day has
    got a little heat in it. My clothes are wretchedly thin, and this frosty
    morning I shall be perished with cold, for you say the city is some way
    off."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="26" unit="line"/>On this Telemakhos strode off through the yards,
    brooding his revenge upon the When he reached home he stood his spear against a
    bearing-post of the room, crossed the stone floor of the room itself, and went
    inside.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="31" unit="line"/>Nurse Eurykleia saw him long before any one else
    did. She was putting the fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as
    she ran up to him; all the other maids came up too, and covered his head and
    shoulders with their kisses. Penelope came out of her room looking like Artemis
    or Aphrodite, and wept as she flung her arms about her son. She kissed his
    forehead and both his beautiful eyes, "Light of my eyes," she cried as she
    spoke fondly to him, "so you are come home again; I made sure I was never going
    to see you any more. To think of your having gone off to <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> without saying anything about it or
    obtaining my consent. But come, tell me what you saw."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="45" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="45" unit="line"/>"Do not scold me, mother,’ answered Telemakhos,
    "nor vex me, seeing what a narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change
    your dress, go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient
    hecatombs to all the gods if Zeus will only grant us our revenge upon the
    suitors. I must now go to the place of assembly to invite a stranger who has
    come back with me from <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>. I sent
    him on with my crew, and told Peiraios to take him home and look after him till
    I could come for him myself."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="57" unit="line"/>She heeded her son's words, washed her face,
    changed her dress, and vowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if
    they would only grant her revenge upon the suitors.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="61" unit="line"/>Telemakhos went through, and out of, the
    cloisters spear in hand - not alone, for his two fleet dogs went with him.
    Athena endowed him with a presence of such divine comeliness [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>] that all marveled at him as he went by, and
    the suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouths and malice in
    their hearts; but he avoided them, and went to sit with Mentor, Antiphos, and
    Halitherses, old friends of his father's house, and they made him tell them all
    that had happened to him. Then Peiraios came up with Theoklymenos, whom he had
    escorted through the town to the place of assembly, whereon Telemakhos at once
    joined them. Peiraios was first to speak: "Telemakhos," said he, "I wish you
    would send some of your women to my house to take away the presents Menelaos
    gave you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="77" unit="line"/>"We do not know, Peiraios," answered Telemakhos,
    "what may happen. If the suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property
    among them, I would rather you had the presents than that any of those people
    should get hold of them. If on the other hand I manage to kill them, I shall be
    much obliged if you will kindly bring me my presents."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="84" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="84" unit="line"/>With these words he took Theoklymenos to his own
    house. When they got there they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats,
    went into the baths, and washed themselves. When the maids had washed and
    anointed them, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at
    table. A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and
    poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands; and she drew a
    clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them bread and offered them
    many good things of what there was in the house. Opposite them sat Penelope,
    reclining on a couch by one of the bearing-posts of the room, and spinning.
    Then they laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as
    soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Penelope said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="101" unit="line"/>"Telemakhos, I shall go upstairs and lie down
    on that sad couch, which I have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day
    Odysseus set out for <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> with the
    sons of Atreus. You failed, however, to make it clear to me before the suitors
    came back to the house, whether or not you had been able to hear anything about
    the return [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] of your father."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="106" unit="line"/>"I will tell you then truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêtheia</term>]," replied her son. "We went to <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> and saw Nestor, who took me to his
    house and treated me as hospitably as though I were a son of his own who had
    just returned after a long absence; so also did his sons; but he said he had
    not heard a word from any human being about Odysseus, whether he was alive or
    dead. He sent me, therefore, with a chariot and horses to Menelaos. There I saw
    Helen, for whose sake so many, both Argives and Trojans, were in heaven's
    wisdom doomed to suffer. Menelaos asked me what it was that had brought me to
    <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName>, and I told him the
    whole truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêtheia</term>], whereon he said, ‘So, then,
    these cowards would usurp a brave man's bed? A hind might as well lay her
    new-born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in the forest or
    in some grassy dell. The lion, when he comes back to his lair, will make short
    work with the pair of them, and so will Odysseus with these suitors. By father
    Zeus, Athena, and Apollo, if Odysseus is still the man that he was when he
    wrestled with Philomeleides in <placeName key="tgn,7002672">Lesbos</placeName>,
    and threw him so heavily that all the Greeks cheered him - if he is still such,
    and were to come near these suitors, they would have a swift doom and a sorry
    wedding. As regards your question, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive
    you, but what the old man of the sea told me, so much will I tell you in full.
    He said he could see Odysseus on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of
    the nymph Calypso, who was keeping him prisoner, and he could not reach his
    home, for he had no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.’ This was what
    Menelaos told me, and when I had heard his story I came away; the gods then
    gave me a fair wind and soon brought me safe home again."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="150" unit="line"/>With these words he moved the heart of
    Penelope. Then Theoklymenos said to her:</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="152" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="152" unit="line"/>"My lady, wife of Odysseus, Telemakhos does not
    understand these things; listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely,
    and will hide nothing from you. May Zeus the king of heaven be my witness, and
    the rites of hospitality, with that hearth of Odysseus to which I now come,
    that Odysseus himself is even now in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, and, either going about the country or staying in one
    place, is inquiring into all these evil deeds and preparing a day of reckoning
    for the suitors. I saw an omen when I was on the ship which meant this, and I
    told Telemakhos about it."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="162" unit="line"/>"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if
    your words come true, you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that
    all who see you shall congratulate you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="166" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors
    were throwing discs, or aiming with spears at a mark on the leveled ground in
    front of the house, and behaving with all their old insolence [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>]. But when it was now time for dinner, and the
    flock of sheep and goats had come into the town from all the country round,
    with their shepherds as usual, then Medon, who was their favorite servant, and
    who waited upon them at table, said, "Now then, my young masters, you have had
    enough sport [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], so come inside that we may
    get dinner ready. Dinner is not a bad thing, at dinner time [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>]."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="177" unit="line"/>They left their sports as he told them, and
    when they were within the house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and
    seats inside, and then sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of
    them fat and well grown. Thus they made ready for their meal. In the meantime
    Odysseus and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and the swineherd
    said, "Stranger, I suppose you still want to go to town to-day, as my master
    said you were to do; for my own part I should have liked you to stay here as a
    station hand, but I must do as my master tells me, or he will scold me later
    on, and a scolding from one's master is a very serious thing. Let us then be
    off, for it is now broad day; it will be night again directly and then you will
    find it colder."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="192" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="192" unit="line"/>"I know, and understand you," replied Odysseus;
    "you need say no more. Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let
    me have it to walk with, for you say the road is a very rough one."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="197" unit="line"/>As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered
    wallet over his shoulders, by the cord from which it hung, and Eumaios gave him
    a stick to his liking. The two then started, leaving the station in charge of
    the dogs and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his
    master followed after, looking like some broken-down old tramp as he leaned
    upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. When they had got over the
    rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reached the fountain from
    which the citizens drew their water. This had been made by Ithacus, Neritus,
    and Polyktor. There was a grove of water-loving poplars planted in a circle all
    round it, and the clear cold water came down to it from a rock high up, while
    above the fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers
    used to sacrifice. Here Melanthios son of Dolios overtook them as he was
    driving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors’ dinner, and
    there were two shepherds with him. When he saw Eumaios and Odysseus he reviled
    them with outrageous and unseemly language, which made Odysseus very angry.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="217" unit="line"/>"There you go," cried he, "and a precious pair
    you are. See how heaven brings birds of the same feather to one another. Where,
    pray, master swineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? It would
    make any one sick to see such a creature at table. A fellow like this never won
    a prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing his shoulders
    against every man's door post, and begging, not for swords and cauldrons like a
    man, but only for a few scraps not worth begging for. If you would give him to
    me for a hand on my station, he might do to clean out the folds, or bring a bit
    of sweet feed to the kids, and he could fatten his thighs as much as he pleased
    on whey; but he has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work;
    he will do nothing but beg victuals all the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>
    over, to feed his insatiable belly. I say, therefore and it shall surely be -
    if he goes near Odysseus’ house he will get his head broken by the stools they
    will fling at him, till they turn him out."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="233" unit="line"/>On this, as he passed, he gave Odysseus a kick
    on the hip out of pure wantonness, but Odysseus stood firm, and did not budge
    from the path. For a moment he doubted whether or not to fly at Melanthios and
    kill him with his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; he
    resolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the swineherd
    looked straight at Melanthios and rebuked him, lifting up his hands and praying
    to heaven as he did so.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="240" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="240" unit="line"/>"Fountain nymphs," he cried, "children of Zeus,
    if ever Odysseus burned you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or
    kids, grant my prayer that a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> may send him
    home. He would soon put an end to the swaggering threats with which such men as
    you go about insulting people- gadding all over the town while your flocks are
    going to ruin through bad shepherding."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="247" unit="line"/>Then Melanthios the goatherd answered, "You
    ill-conditioned cur, what are you talking about? Some day or other I will put
    you on board ship and take you to a foreign country, where I can sell you and
    keep the wealth you will fetch. I wish I were as sure that Apollo would strike
    Telemakhos dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill him, as I am that
    Odysseus will never come home again."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="254" unit="line"/>With this he left them to come on at their
    leisure, while he went quickly forward and soon reached the house of his
    master. When he got there he went in and took his seat among the suitors
    opposite Eurymakhos, who liked him better than any of the others. The servants
    brought him a portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set bread before him
    that he might eat. Presently Odysseus and the swineherd came up to the house
    and stood by it, amid a sound of music, for Phemios was just beginning to sing
    to the suitors. Then Odysseus took hold of the swineherd's hand, and said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="264" unit="line"/>"Eumaios, this house of Odysseus is a very fine
    place. No matter how far you go you will find few like it. One building keeps
    following on after another. The outer court has a wall with battlements all
    round it; the doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it would be a
    hard matter to take it by force of arms. I perceive, too, that there are many
    people banqueting within it, for there is a smell of roast meat, and I hear a
    sound of music, which the gods have made to go along with feasting."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="272" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="272" unit="line"/>Then Eumaios said, "You have perceived aright,
    as indeed you generally do; but let us think what will be our best course. Will
    you go inside first and join the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will
    you wait here and let me go in first? But do not wait long, or some one may you
    loitering about outside, and throw something at you. Consider this matter I
    pray you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="280" unit="line"/>And Odysseus answered, "I understand and heed.
    Go in first and leave me here where I am. I am quite used to being beaten and
    having things thrown at me. I have been so much buffeted about in war and by
    sea that I am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. But a man
    cannot hide away the cravings of a hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives
    much trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships are fitted out to
    sail the seas, and to make war upon other people."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="290" unit="line"/>As they were thus talking, a dog that had been
    lying asleep raised his head and pricked up his ears. This was Argos, whom
    Odysseus had bred before setting out for <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, but he had never had any work out of him. In the old days
    he used to be taken out by the young men when they went hunting wild goats, or
    deer, or hares, but now that his master was gone he was lying neglected on the
    heaps of mule and cow dung that lay in front of the stable doors till the men
    should come and draw it away to manure the great field; and he was full of
    fleas. As soon as he saw Odysseus standing there, he dropped his ears and
    wagged his tail, but he could not get close up to his master. When Odysseus saw
    the dog on the other side of the yard, dashed a tear from his eyes without
    Eumaios seeing it, and said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="306" unit="line"/>"Eumaios, what a noble hound that is over
    yonder on the manure heap: his build is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he
    looks, or is he only one of those dogs that come begging about a table, and are
    kept merely for show?"</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="311" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="311" unit="line"/>"This hound," answered Eumaios, "belonged to
    him who has died in a far country. If he were what he was when Odysseus left
    for <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, he would soon show you what
    he could do. There was not a wild beast in the forest that could get away from
    him when he was once on its tracks. But now he has fallen on evil times, for
    his master is dead and gone, and the women take no care of him. Servants never
    do their work when their master's hand is no longer over them, for Zeus takes
    half the goodness [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>] out of a man when he
    makes a slave of him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="324" unit="line"/>As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the
    room where the suitors were, but <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName> died as soon as he had recognized his master.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="328" unit="line"/>Telemakhos saw Eumaios long before any one else
    did, and beckoned him to come and sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a
    seat lying near where the carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors;
    he picked it up, brought it to Telemakhos’ table, and sat down opposite him.
    Then the servant brought him his portion, and gave him bread from the
    bread-basket.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="336" unit="line"/>Immediately afterwards Odysseus came inside,
    looking like a poor miserable old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his
    clothes all in rags. He sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the
    doors leading from the outer to the inner court, and against a bearing-post of
    cypress-wood which the carpenter had skillfully planed, and had made to join
    truly with rule and line. Telemakhos took a whole loaf from the bread-basket,
    with as much meat as he could hold in his two hands, and said to Eumaios, "Take
    this to the stranger, and tell him to go the round of the suitors, and beg from
    them; a beggar must not be shamefaced [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>]."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="348" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="348" unit="line"/>So Eumaios went up to him and said, "Stranger,
    Telemakhos sends you this, and says you are to go the round of the suitors
    begging, for beggars must not be shamefaced [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>]."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="353" unit="line"/>Odysseus answered, "May lord Zeus grant all
    happiness [<term xml:lang="grc">olbos</term>] to Telemakhos, and fulfill the
    desire of his heart."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="356" unit="line"/>Then with both hands he took what Telemakhos
    had sent him, and laid it on the dirty old wallet at his feet. He went on
    eating it while the bard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as he
    left off. The suitors applauded the bard, whereon Athena went up to Odysseus
    and prompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors, that he
    might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good from the bad; but
    come what might she was not going to save a single one of them. Odysseus,
    therefore, went on his round, going from left to right, and stretched out his
    hands to beg as though he were a real beggar. Some of them pitied him, and were
    curious about him, asking one another who he was and where he came from;
    whereon the goatherd Melanthios said, "Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell
    you something about him, for I have seen him before. The swineherd brought him
    here, but I know nothing about the man himself, nor where he comes from."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="374" unit="line"/>On this Antinoos began to abuse the swineherd.
    "You precious idiot," he cried, "what have you brought this man to town for?
    Have we not tramps and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat?
    Do you think it a small thing that such people gather here to waste your
    master's property and must you needs bring this man as well?"</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="380" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="380" unit="line"/>And Eumaios answered, "Antinoos, your birth is
    good but your words evil. It was no doing of mine that he came here. Who is
    likely to invite a stranger from a foreign country, unless it be one of those
    who can do public service as a seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>], a
    healer of hurts, a carpenter, or a bard who can delight us with his singing.
    Such men are welcome all the world over, but no one is likely to ask a beggar
    who will only worry him. You are always harder on Odysseus’ servants than any
    of the other suitors are, and above all on me, but I do not care so long as
    Telemakhos and Penelope are alive and here."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="392" unit="line"/>But Telemakhos said, "Hush, do not answer him;
    Antinoos has the bitterest tongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others
    worse."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="396" unit="line"/>Then turning to Antinoos he said, "Antinoos,
    you take as much care of my interests as though I were your son. Why should you
    want to see this stranger turned out of the house? Heaven forbid; take
    something and give it him yourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it.
    Never mind my mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but I know
    you will not do what I say, for you are more fond of eating things yourself
    than of giving them to other people."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="405" unit="line"/>"What do you mean, Telemakhos," replied
    Antinoos, "by this swaggering talk? If all the suitors were to give him as much
    as I will, he would not come here again for another three months."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="409" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="409" unit="line"/>As he spoke he drew the stool on which he
    rested his dainty feet from under the table, and made as though he would throw
    it at Odysseus, but the other suitors all gave him something, and filled his
    wallet with bread and meat; he was about, therefore, to go back to the
    threshold and eat what the suitors had given him, but he first went up to
    Antinoos and said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="415" unit="line"/>"Sir, give me something; you are not, surely,
    the poorest man here; you seem to be a chief, foremost among them all;
    therefore you should be the better giver, and I will tell far and wide of your
    bounty. I too was a rich [<term xml:lang="grc">olbios</term>] man once, and had
    a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am,
    no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and
    all the other things which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy,
    but it pleased Zeus to take all away from me. He sent me with a band of roving
    robbers to <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>; it was a long voyage
    and I was undone by it. I stationed my ships in the river Aigyptos, and bade my
    men stay by them and keep guard over them, while I sent out scouts to
    reconnoiter from every point of vantage.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="431" unit="line"/>"But the men insolently disobeyed [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>] my orders, took to their own devices, and
    ravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and
    children captives. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard
    the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled with
    soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam of armor. Then Zeus spread panic
    among my men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they found
    themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive
    to do forced labor for them; as for myself, they gave me to a friend who met
    them, to take to <placeName key="tgn,1000112">Cyprus</placeName>, Dmetor by
    name, son of Iasos, who was a great man in <placeName key="tgn,1000112">Cyprus</placeName>. Thence I am come hither in a state of great
    misery."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="445" unit="line"/>Then Antinoos said, "What <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> can have sent such a pestilence to plague us during our
    dinner? Get out, into the open part of the court, or I will give you <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName> and <placeName key="tgn,1000112">Cyprus</placeName> over again for your insolence and importunity; you have
    begged of all the others, and they have given you lavishly, for they have
    abundance round them, and it is easy to be free with other people's property
    when there is plenty of it."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="453" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="453" unit="line"/>On this Odysseus began to move off, and said,
    "Your looks, my fine sir, are better than your breeding; if you were in your
    own house you would not spare a poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though
    you are in another man's, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in
    you to give him even a piece of bread."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="458" unit="line"/>This made Antinoos very angry, and he scowled
    at him saying, "You shall pay for this before you get clear of the court." With
    these words he threw a footstool at him, and hit him on the right
    shoulder-blade near the top of his back. Odysseus stood firm as a rock and the
    blow did not even stagger him, but he shook his head in silence as he brooded
    on his revenge. Then he went back to the threshold and sat down there, laying
    his well-filled wallet at his feet.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="468" unit="line"/>"Listen to me," he cried, "you suitors of Queen
    Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded. A man knows neither ache [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] nor pain [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>]
    if he gets hit while fighting for his wealth, or for his sheep or his cattle;
    and even so Antinoos has hit me while in the service of my miserable belly,
    which is always getting people into trouble. Still, if the poor have gods and
    avenging deities at all, I pray them that Antinoos may come to a bad end before
    his marriage."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="477" unit="line"/>"Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in
    silence, or be off elsewhere," shouted Antinoos. "If you say more I will have
    you dragged hand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay you
    alive."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="481" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="481" unit="line"/>The other suitors were much displeased at this,
    and one of the young men said, "Antinoos, you did ill in striking that poor
    wretch of a tramp: it will be worse for you if he should turn out to be some
    god - and we know the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as people
    from foreign countries, and travel about the world to see who do amiss [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>] and who righteously."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="488" unit="line"/>Thus said the suitors, but Antinoos paid them
    no heed. Meanwhile Telemakhos was greatly distressed [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>] about the blow that had been given to his father, and
    though no tear fell from him, he shook his head in silence and brooded on his
    revenge.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="492" unit="line"/>Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had
    been struck in the banqueting-room, she said before her maids, "Would that
    Apollo would so strike you, Antinoos," and her waiting woman Eurynome answered,
    "If our prayers were answered not one of the suitors would ever again see the
    sun rise." Then Penelope said, "Nurse, every single one of them is hateful
    [<term xml:lang="grc">ekhthroi</term>] to me, for they mean nothing but
    mischief, but I hate Antinoos like the darkness of death itself. A poor
    unfortunate tramp has come begging about the house for sheer want. Every one
    else has given him something to put in his wallet, but Antinoos has hit him on
    the right shoulder-blade with a footstool."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="505" unit="line"/>Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in
    her own room, and in the meantime Odysseus was getting his dinner. Then she
    called for the swineherd and said, "Eumaios, go and tell the stranger to come
    here, I want to see him and ask him some questions. He seems to have traveled
    much, and he may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="512" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="512" unit="line"/>To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaios, "If
    these Achaeans, my lady, would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the
    history of his adventures. I had him three days and three nights with me in my
    hut, which was the first place he reached after running away from his ship, and
    he has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes. If he had been the most
    heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose lips all hearers hang
    entranced, I could not have been more charmed as I sat in my hut and listened
    to him. He says there is an old friendship between his house and that of
    Odysseus, and that he comes from <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName>
    where the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven here and there by
    every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he has heard of Odysseus as
    being alive and near at hand among the Thesprotians [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>], and that he is bringing great wealth home with him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="528" unit="line"/>"Call him here, then," said Penelope, "that I
    too may hear his story. As for the suitors, let them take their pleasure
    indoors or out as they will, for they have nothing to fret about. Their grain
    and wine remain unwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume
    them, while they keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our
    oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a
    thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate can stand such
    recklessness, for we have now no Odysseus to protect us. If he were to come
    again, he and his son would soon have their violent revenge [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>]."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="541" unit="line"/>As she spoke Telemakhos sneezed so loudly that
    the whole house resounded with it. Penelope laughed when she heard this, and
    said to Eumaios, "Go and call the stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezed
    just as I was speaking? This can only mean that all the suitors are going to be
    killed, and that not one of them shall escape. Furthermore I say, and lay my
    saying to your heart: if I am satisfied that the stranger is speaking the truth
    I shall give him a shirt and cloak of good wear."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="551" unit="line"/>When Eumaios heard this he went straight to
    Odysseus and said, "Father stranger, my mistress Penelope, mother of
    Telemakhos, has sent for you; she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear
    anything you can tell her about her husband, and if she is satisfied that you
    are speaking the truth, she will give you a shirt and cloak, which are the very
    things that you are most in want of. As for bread, you can get enough of that
    to fill your belly, by begging about the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, and
    letting those give that will."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="560" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="560" unit="line"/>"I will tell Penelope," answered Odysseus,
    "nothing but what is strictly true. I know all about her husband, and have been
    partner with him in affliction, but I am afraid of passing through this crowd
    of cruel suitors, for their overweening pride [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>] and violent insolence [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>]
    reach heaven. Just now, moreover, as I was going about the house without doing
    any harm, a man gave me a blow that hurt me very much, but neither Telemakhos
    nor any one else defended me. Tell Penelope, therefore, to be patient and wait
    till sundown. Let her give me a seat close up to the fire, for my clothes are
    worn very thin - you know they are, for you have seen them ever since I first
    asked you to help me - she can then ask me about the return of her
    husband."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="574" unit="line"/>The swineherd went back when he heard this, and
    Penelope said as she saw him cross the threshold, "Why do you not bring him
    here, Eumaios? Is he afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of
    coming inside the house at all? Beggars should not be shamefaced."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="579" unit="line"/>To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaios, "The
    stranger is quite reasonable. He is avoiding the outrageous [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>] suitors, and is only doing what any one else
    would do. He asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much better, my
    lady, that you should have him all to yourself, when you can hear him and talk
    to him as you will."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="585" unit="line"/>"The man is no fool," answered Penelope, "it
    would very likely be as he says, for there are no such abominable people in the
    whole world as these men are."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:17"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="589" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="589" unit="line"/>When she had done speaking Eumaios went back to
    the suitors, for he had explained everything. Then he went up to Telemakhos and
    said in his ear so that none could overhear him, "My dear sir, I will now go
    back to the pigs, to see after your property and my own business. You will look
    to what is going on here, but above all be careful to keep out of danger, for
    there are many who bear you ill will. May Zeus bring them to a bad end before
    they do us a mischief."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="598" unit="line"/>"Very well," replied Telemakhos, "go home when
    you have had your dinner, and in the morning come here with the victims we are
    to sacrifice for the day. Leave the rest to heaven and me."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="602" unit="line"/>On this Eumaios took his seat again, and when
    he had finished his dinner he left the courts and the room with the men at
    table, and went back to his pigs. As for the suitors, they presently began to
    amuse themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting on towards
    evening. <milestone n="606" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

