+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Odysseus now left the haven, and took the rough
    track up through the wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he
    reached the place where Athena had said that he would find the swineherd, who
    was the most thrifty servant he had. He found him sitting in front of his hut,
    which was by the yards that he had built on a site which could be seen from
    far. He had made them spacious and fair to see, with a free ran for the pigs
    all round them; he had built them during his master's absence, of stones which
    he had gathered out of the ground, without saying anything to Penelope or
    <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, and he had fenced them
    on top with thorn bushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong fence of oaken
    posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside lie had built twelve
    sties near one another for the sows to lie in. There were fifty pigs wallowing
    in each sty, all of them breeding sows; but the boars slept outside and were
    much fewer in number, for the suitors kept on eating them, and the swineherd
    had to send them the best he had continually. There were three hundred and
    sixty boar pigs, and the herdsman's four hounds, which were as fierce as
    wolves, slept always with them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a
    pair of sandals from a good stout ox hide. Three of his men were out herding
    the pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the fourth to town with a
    boar that he had been forced to send the suitors that they might sacrifice it
    and have their fill of meat.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="29" unit="line"/>When the hounds saw Odysseus they set up a
    furious barking and flew at him, but Odysseus was cunning enough to sit down
    and loose his hold of the stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have
    been torn by them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox
    hide, rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off by
    shouting and throwing stones at them. Then he said to Odysseus, "Old man, the
    dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you would have got me
    into trouble. The gods have given me quite enough worries without that, for I
    have lost the best of masters, and am in continual grief on his account. I have
    to attend swine for other people to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the
    light of day, is starving in some distant <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>.
    But come inside, and when you have had your fill of bread and wine, tell me
    where you come from, and all about your misfortunes."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="48" unit="line"/>On this the swineherd led the way into the hut
    and bade him sit down. He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor,
    and on the top of this he threw the shaggy chamois skin - a great thick one -
    on which he used to sleep by night. Odysseus was pleased at being made thus
    welcome, and said "May Zeus, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your
    heart's desire in return for the kind way in which you have received me."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="55" unit="line"/>To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaios,
    "Stranger, though a still poorer man should come here, it would not be right
    for me to insult him, for all strangers and beggars are from Zeus. You must
    take what you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have
    young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for heaven has
    hindered the return [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] of him who would have
    been always good to me and given me something of my own - a house, a piece of
    land, a good looking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant
    who has worked hard for him, and whose labor the gods have prospered as they
    have mine in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown old here he
    would have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I wish that Helen's
    whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been the death of many a good
    man. It was this matter that took my master to <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the
    cause of king Agamemnon."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="72" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="72" unit="line"/>As he spoke he bound his belt round him and went
    to the sties where the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which
    he brought back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and
    spitted on them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it
    before Odysseus, hot and still on the spit, whereon Odysseus sprinkled it over
    with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of ivy-wood,
    and taking a seat opposite Odysseus told him to begin.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="80" unit="line"/>"Fall to, stranger," said he, "on a dish of
    servant's pork. The fat pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without
    shame or scruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and
    respect those who do what is lawful and right [<term xml:lang="grc">dikê</term>]. Even the fierce free-booters who go raiding on other people's
    land, and Zeus gives them their spoil - even they, when they have filled their
    ships and got home again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for
    judgment; but some god seems to have told these people that Odysseus is dead
    and gone; they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their
    offers of marriage in the proper way [<term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>], but
    waste his estate by force, without fear or stint. Not a day or night comes out
    of heaven, but they sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the
    run of his wine, for he was exceedingly rich. No other great man either in
    <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> or on the mainland is as
    rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put together. I will tell you what
    he had. There are twelve herds of cattle upon the mainland, and as many flocks
    of sheep, there are also twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired
    strangers feed him twelve widely spreading herds of goats. Here in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> he runs even large flocks of goats on
    the far end of the island, and they are in the charge of excellent goatherds.
    Each one of these sends the suitors the best goat in the flock every day. As
    for myself, I am in charge of the pigs that you see here, and I have to keep
    picking [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] out the best I have and sending it
    to them."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="109" unit="line"/>This was his story, but Odysseus went on eating
    and drinking ravenously without a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten
    enough and was satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually
    drank, filled it with wine, and gave it to Odysseus, who was pleased, and said
    as he took it in his hands, "My friend, who was this master of yours that
    bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell me? You say he
    perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who he was, in case I may have
    met with such a person. Zeus and the other gods know, but I may be able to give
    you news of him, for I have traveled much."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="121" unit="line"/>Eumaios answered, "Old man, no traveler who
    comes here with news will get Odysseus’ wife and son to believe his story.
    Nevertheless, tramps in want of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of
    lies, and not a word of truth [<term xml:lang="grc">alêthês</term>]; every one
    who finds his way to the Ithacan <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> goes to my
    mistress and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes much of
    them, and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the time as women will
    when they have lost their husbands. And you too, old man, for a shirt and a
    cloak would doubtless make up a very pretty story. But the wolves and birds of
    prey have long since torn Odysseus to pieces, and his <term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term> left him behind; or the fishes of the sea have eaten him, and
    his bones are lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; he is dead and
    gone, and a bad business it is for all his friends - for me especially; go
    where I may I shall never find so good a master, not even if I were to go home
    to my mother and father where I was bred and born. I do not so much care,
    however, about my parents now, though I should dearly like to see them again in
    my own country; it is the loss of Odysseus that grieves me most; I cannot speak
    of him without reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very fond of
    me, and took such care of me that wherever he may be I shall always honor his
    memory."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="148" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="148" unit="line"/>"My friend," replied Odysseus, "you are very
    positive, and very hard of belief about your master's coming home again,
    nevertheless I will not merely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not
    give me anything for my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a
    shirt and cloak of good wear if you will. I am in great want, but I will not
    take anything at all till then, for hateful [<term xml:lang="grc">ekhthros</term>] is the man, as hateful as Hades, who lets his poverty
    tempt him into lying. I swear by king Zeus, by the rites of hospitality, and by
    that hearth of Odysseus to which I have now come, that all will surely happen
    as I have said it will. Odysseus will return in this self same year; with the
    end of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance
    on all those who are ill treating his wife and son."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="165" unit="line"/>To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaios, "Old
    man, you will neither get paid for bringing good news, nor will Odysseus ever
    come home; drink you wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. Do
    not keep on reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any one speaks
    about my honored master. As for your oath we will let it alone, but I only wish
    he may come, as do Penelope, his old father <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, and his son Telemakhos. I am terribly unhappy too
    about this same boy of his; he was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare
    to be no worse man, face and figure, than his father, but some one, either god
    or man, has been unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> to try and get news of his father, and
    the suitors are lying in wait for him as he is coming home, in the hope of
    leaving the house of Arceisius without a name in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>. But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be
    taken, or else to escape if the son of Kronos holds his hand over him to
    protect him. And now, old man, tell me your own story; tell me also, for I want
    to know, who you are and where you come from. Tell me of your town and parents,
    what manner of ship you came in, what crew brought you to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, and from what country they professed
    to come - for you cannot have come by land."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="191" unit="line"/>And Odysseus answered, "I will tell you all
    about it. If there were meat and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut
    with nothing to do but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I
    could easily talk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the story
    of the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="199" unit="line"/>"I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a
    well-to-do man, who had many sons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a
    slave whom he had purchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son
    of Hylax (whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honor in the
    <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of the Cretans for his wealth, prosperity
    [<term xml:lang="grc">olbos</term>], and the valor of his sons) put me on
    the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock. When, however,
    death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided his estate and cast lots
    for their shares, but to me they gave a holding and little else; nevertheless,
    my valor [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>] enabled me to marry into a rich
    family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on the field of battle. It
    is all over now; still, if you look at the straw you can see what the ear was,
    for I have had trouble enough and to spare. Ares and Athena made me doughty in
    war; when I had picked [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] my men to surprise
    the enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death so much as a thought, but was
    the first to leap forward and spear all whom I could overtake. Such was I in
    battle, but I did not care about farm work, nor the frugal home life of those
    who would bring up children. My delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and
    arrows - things that most men shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing
    and another another, and this was what I was most naturally inclined to. Before
    the Achaeans went to <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, nine times
    was I in command of men and ships on foreign service, and I amassed much
    wealth. I had my pick of the spoil in the first instance, and much more was
    allotted to me later on.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="233" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="233" unit="line"/>"My house grew apace and I became a great man
    among the Cretans, but when Zeus counseled that terrible expedition, in which
    so many perished, the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and there was no way out of
    it, for the judgment of the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> insisted on our
    doing so. There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked the
    city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. Then it was that
    Zeus devised evil against me. I spent but one month happily with my children,
    wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea of making a descent on
    <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>, so I fitted out a fine fleet
    and manned it. I had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six
    days I and my men made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice
    to the gods and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board and set
    sail from <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName> with a fair North wind
    behind us though we were going down a river. Nothing went ill with any of our
    ships, and we had no sickness on board, but sat where we were and let the ships
    go as the wind and steersmen took them. On the fifth day we reached the river
    Aigyptos; there I stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay by them
    and keep guard over them while I sent out scouts to reconnoiter from every
    point of vantage.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="262" unit="line"/>"But the men in their insolence [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>] disobeyed my orders, took to their own
    devices, and ravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking
    their wives and children captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and
    when they heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was
    filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of armor. Then Zeus
    spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they
    found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest
    alive to do forced labor for them. Zeus, however, put it in my mind to do thus
    - and I wish I had died then and there in <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName> instead, for there was much sorrow in store for me - I
    took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand; then I went
    straight up to the king's chariot, clasped his knees and kissed them, whereon
    he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot, and took me weeping to his own
    home. Many made at me with their ashen spears and tried to kill me in their
    fury, but the king protected me, for he feared the <term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term> of Zeus the protector of strangers, who punishes those who do
    evil.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="285" unit="line"/>"I stayed there for seven years and got
    together much wealth among the Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but
    when it was now going on for eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a
    cunning rascal, who had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man
    talked me over into going with him to <placeName key="tgn,6004687">Phoenicia</placeName>, where his house and his possessions lay. I stayed
    there for a whole twelve months, but at the end of that time when months and
    days had gone by till the same season [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>] had
    come round again, he set me on board a ship bound for <placeName key="tgn,1000172">Libya</placeName>, on a pretense that I was to take a
    cargo along with him to that place, but really that he might sell me as a slave
    and take the wealth I fetched. I suspected his intention, but went on board
    with him, for I could not help it.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="299" unit="line"/>"The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we
    had reached the sea that lies between <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName> and <placeName key="tgn,1000172">Libya</placeName>;
    there, however, Zeus counseled their destruction, for as soon as we were well
    out from <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName> and could see nothing
    but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship and the sea grew dark
    beneath it. Then Zeus let fly with his thunderbolts and the ship went round and
    round and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it. The
    men fell all into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship
    looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all
    chance of homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] again. I was all
    dismayed; Zeus, however, sent the ship's mast within my reach, which saved my
    life, for I clung to it, and drifted before the fury of the gale. Nine days did
    I drift but in the darkness of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the
    Thesprotian coast. There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me
    hospitably without charging me anything at all, for his son found me when I was
    nearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand, took me to
    his father's house and gave me clothes to wear.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="321" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="321" unit="line"/>"There it was that I heard news of Odysseus,
    for the king told me he had entertained him, and shown him much hospitality
    while he was on his homeward journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold,
    and wrought iron that Odysseus had got together. There was enough to keep his
    family for ten generations, so much had he left in the house of king Pheidon.
    But the king said Odysseus had gone to <placeName key="perseus,Dodona">Dodona</placeName> that he might learn Zeus’ mind from the god's high oak
    tree, and know whether after so long an absence he should return to the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> openly, or in secret. Moreover the king swore in my
    presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as he did so, that the ship
    was by the water side, and the crew found, that should take him to his own
    country. He sent me off however before Odysseus returned, for there happened to
    be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he
    told those in charge of her to be sure and take me safely to King Akastos.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="337" unit="line"/>"These men hatched a plot against me that would
    have reduced me to the very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some
    way out from land they resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of
    the shirt and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered old
    clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they reached the
    tilled lands of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, and there they
    bound me with a strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get
    supper by the sea side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having
    drawn my rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I struck
    out and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near a thick wood
    in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at my having escaped and went
    searching about for me, till at last they thought it was no further use and
    went back to their ship. The gods, having hidden me thus easily, then took me
    to a good man's door - for it seems that I am not to die yet awhile."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="360" unit="line"/>To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaios,
    "Poor unhappy stranger, I have found the story of your misfortunes extremely
    interesting, but that part about Odysseus is not right [<term xml:lang="grc">kosmos</term>]; and you will never get me to believe it. Why should a man
    like you go about telling lies in this way? I know all about the return [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] of my master. The gods one and all of them
    detest him, or they would have taken him before <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, or let him die with friends around him when the days of
    his fighting were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his
    ashes and his son would have been heir to his <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>, but now the storm winds have spirited him away we know not
    where.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="372" unit="line"/>"As for me I live out of the way here with the
    pigs, and never go to the town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival
    of some news about Odysseus. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both
    those who grieve over the king's absence, and those who rejoice at it because
    they can eat up his property without paying for it. For my own part I have
    never cared about asking anyone else since the time when I was taken in by an
    Aetolian, who had killed a man and come a long way till at last he reached my
    station, and I was very kind to him. He said he had seen Odysseus with
    Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting his ships which had been damaged in a
    gale. He said Odysseus would return in the following summer or autumn with his
    men, and that he would bring back much wealth. And now you, you unfortunate old
    man, since a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> has brought you to my door, do
    not try to flatter me in this way with vain hopes. It is not for any such
    reason that I shall treat you kindly, but only out of respect for Zeus the god
    of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying you."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="390" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="390" unit="line"/>Odysseus answered, "I see that you are of an
    unbelieving mind; I have given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let
    us then make a bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your
    master comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to
    Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say he will, set
    your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder precipice, as a
    warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="401" unit="line"/>"And <term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term> famed
    among men would be mine<term xml:lang="grc"/> " replied Eumaios, "both now and
    hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and showing
    you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good earnest if I did; but
    it is just supper time [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>] and I hope my men
    will come in directly, that we may cook something savory for supper."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="409" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse, and presently the
    swineherds came up with the pigs, which were then shut up for the night in
    their sties, and a tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven
    into them. But Eumaios called to his men and said, "Bring in the best pig you
    have, that I may sacrifice for this stranger, and we will take toll of him
    ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs, while others
    reap the fruit of our labor."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="418" unit="line"/>On this he began chopping firewood, while the
    others brought in a fine fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar.
    Eumaios did not forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the
    first thing he did was to cut bristles from the pig's face and throw them into
    the fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Odysseus might return home
    again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of oak which he had kept back when
    he was chopping the firewood, and its <term xml:lang="grc">psukhê </term>left
    it, while the others slaughtered and singed it. Then they cut it up, and
    Eumaios began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the fat;
    these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers; they cut the
    rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits and roasted them till
    they were done; when they had taken them off the spits they threw them on to
    the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, who was a most equitable man, then stood
    up to give every one his share. He made seven portions; one of these he set
    apart for Hermes the son of <placeName key="tgn,1049816">Maia</placeName> and
    the nymphs, praying to them as he did so; the others he dealt out to the men
    man by man. He gave Odysseus some slices cut lengthways down the loin as a mark
    of especial honor, and Odysseus was much pleased. "I hope, Eumaios," said he,
    "that Zeus will be as well disposed towards you as I am, for the respect you
    are showing to an outcast like myself."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="441" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="441" unit="line"/>To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaios,
    "Eat, my good fellow, and enjoy your supper, such as it is. A god grants this,
    and withholds that, just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he
    chooses."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="446" unit="line"/>As he spoke he cut off the first piece and
    offered it as a burnt sacrifice to the immortal gods; then he made them a
    drink-offering, put the cup in the hands of Odysseus, and sat down to his own
    portion. Mesaulios brought them their bread; the swineherd had bought this man
    on his own account from among the Taphians during his master's absence, and had
    paid for him with his own wealth without saying anything either to his mistress
    or <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>. They then laid their
    hands upon the good things that were before them, and when they had had enough
    to eat and drink, Mesaulios took away what was left of the bread, and they all
    went to bed after having made a hearty supper.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="457" unit="line"/>Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for
    there was no moon. It poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the
    West, which is a wet quarter, so Odysseus thought he would see whether Eumaios,
    in the excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak and give it
    him, or make one of his men give him one. "Listen to me," said he, "Eumaios and
    the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tell you something. It is the
    wine that makes me talk in this way; wine will make even a wise man fall to
    singing; it will make him chuckle and dance and say many a word that he had
    better leave unspoken; still, as I have begun, I will go on. Would that I were
    still young and strong [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] as when we got up an
    ambuscade before <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>. Menelaos and
    Odysseus were the leaders, but I was in command also, for the other two would
    have it so. When we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down
    beneath our armor and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brush-wood
    that grew about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the
    snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated thick
    with rime. The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept comfortably
    enough with their shields about their shoulders, but I had carelessly left my
    cloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too cold, and had gone off in
    nothing but my shirt and shield. When the night was two-thirds through and the
    stars had shifted their places, I nudged Odysseus who was close to me with my
    elbow, and he at once gave me his ear.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="486" unit="line"/>"‘Odysseus,’ said I, ‘this cold will be the
    death of me, for I have no cloak; some <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term>
    fooled me into setting off with nothing on but my shirt, and I do not know what
    to do.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="490" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="490" unit="line"/>"Odysseus, who was as crafty as he was valiant,
    hit upon the following plan [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>]:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="493" unit="line"/>"‘Keep still,’ said he in a low voice, ‘or the
    others will hear you.’ Then he raised his head on his elbow.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="495" unit="line"/>"‘My friends,’ said he, ‘I have had a dream
    from heaven in my sleep. We are a long way from the ships; I wish some one
    would go down and tell Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="499" unit="line"/>"On this Thoas son of Andraimon threw off his
    cloak and set out running to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it
    comfortably enough till morning. Would that I were still young and strong
    [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] as I was in those days, for then some one
    of you swineherds would give me a cloak both out of good will and for the
    respect [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>] due to a brave warrior; but now
    people look down upon me because my clothes are shabby."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:14"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="507" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="507" unit="line"/>And Eumaios answered, "Old man, you have told
    us an excellent story [<term xml:lang="grc">ainos</term>], and have said
    nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the present, therefore, you
    shall want neither clothing nor anything else that a stranger in distress may
    reasonably expect, but tomorrow morning you have to shake your own old rags
    about your body again, for we have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here,
    but every man has only one. When Odysseus’ son comes home again he will give
    you both cloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="518" unit="line"/>With this he got up and made a bed for Odysseus
    by throwing some goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire.
    Here Odysseus lay down, and Eumaios covered him over with a great heavy cloak
    that he kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="523" unit="line"/>Thus did Odysseus sleep, and the young men
    slept beside him. But the swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs,
    so he got ready to go and Odysseus was glad to see that he looked after his
    property during his master's absence. First he slung his sword over his brawny
    shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also took the skin
    of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of attack from men or dogs.
    Thus equipped he went to his rest where the pigs were camping under an
    overhanging rock that gave them shelter from the North wind. <milestone n="533" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

