+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Thus did the Trojans watch. But Panic, comrade of
    blood-stained Rout, had taken fast hold of the Achaeans and their princes were
    all of them in despair. As when the two winds that blow from <placeName key="tgn,7002756">Thrace</placeName> - the north and the northwest - spring
    up of a sudden and rouse the fury of the main [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>] - in a moment the dark waves uprear their heads and scatter
    their sea-wrack in all directions - even thus troubled were the hearts of the
    Achaeans. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="9" unit="line"/>The son of Atreus in dismay bade the heralds call
    the people to a council man by man, but not to cry the matter aloud; he made
    haste also himself to call them, and they sat sorry at heart in their assembly.
    Agamemnon shed tears as it were a running stream or cataract on the side of
    some sheer cliff; and thus, with many a heavy sigh he spoke to the Achaeans.
    "My friends," said he, "princes and councilors, Zeus has tied down with ruin
    [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>] more than any other <placeName key="tgn,5001993">Argive</placeName>. The cruel god gave me his solemn
    promise that I should sack the city of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> before returning, but he has played me false, and is now
    bidding me go back to <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName> with bad
    <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> and with the loss of many people. Such is
    the will of Zeus, who has laid many a proud city in the dust as he will yet lay
    others, for his power is above all. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say and
    sail back to our own country, for we shall not take <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="29" unit="line"/>Thus he spoke, and the sons of the Achaeans for
    a long while sat sorrowful there, but they all held their peace, till at last
    Diomedes of the loud battle-cry made answer saying,</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="32" unit="line"/>"Son of Atreus, I will chide your folly, as is
    my right [themis] in council. Be not then aggrieved that I should do so. In the
    first place you attacked me before all the Danaans and said that I was a coward
    and no warrior. The Argives young and old know that you did so. But the son of
    scheming Kronos endowed you by halves only. He gave you honor as the chief
    ruler over us, but valor, which is the highest both right and might he did not
    give you. Sir, think you that the sons of the Achaeans are indeed as unwarlike
    and cowardly as you say they are? If your own mind is set upon going home - go
    - the way is open to you; the many ships that followed you from <placeName key="perseus,Mycenae">Mycenae</placeName> stand ranged upon the seashore;
    but the rest of us stay here till we have sacked <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>. Nay though these too should turn homeward with their
    ships, Sthenelos and myself will still fight on till we reach the goal of
    <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>, for heaven was with us when
    we came." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="50" unit="line"/>The sons of the Achaeans shouted approval at the
    words of Diomedes, and presently Nestor rose to speak. "Son of Tydeus," said
    he, "in war your prowess is beyond question, and in council you excel all who
    are of your own years; no one of the Achaeans can make light of what you say
    nor gainsay it, but you have not yet come to the end [<term xml:lang="grc">telos</term>] of the whole matter. You are still young - you might be the
    youngest of my own children - still you have spoken wisely and have counseled
    the chief of the Achaeans not without discretion; nevertheless I am older than
    you and I will tell you every" thing; therefore let no man, not even King
    Agamemnon, disregard my saying, for he that foments civil discord is a
    clanless, hearthless outlaw. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="65" unit="line"/>"Now, however, let us obey the behests of night
    and get our suppers, but let the sentinels every man of them camp by the trench
    that is without the wall. I am giving these instructions to the young men; when
    they have been attended to, do you, son of Atreus, give your orders, for you
    are the most royal among us all. Prepare a feast for your councilors; it is
    right and reasonable that you should do so;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="71" unit="line"/>there is abundance of wine in your tents, which
    the ships of the Achaeans bring from <placeName key="tgn,7002756">Thrace</placeName> daily over the sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>].
    You have everything at your disposal wherewith to entertain guests, and you
    have many subjects. When many are got together, you can be guided by him whose
    counsel is wisest - and sorely do we need shrewd and prudent counsel, for the
    foe has lit his watchfires hard by our ships. Who can be other than dismayed?
    This night will either be the ruin of our host, or save it." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="79" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had
    said. The sentinels went out in their armor under command of Nestor's son
    Thrasymedes, a leader of the host, and of the bold warriors Askalaphos and
    Ialmenos: there were also Meriones, Aphareus and Deipyros, and the son of
    Kreion, noble Lykomedes. There were seven leaders of the sentinels, and with
    each there went a hundred youths armed with long spears: they took their places
    midway between the trench and the wall, and when they had done so they lit
    their fires and got every man his supper. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="89" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="89" unit="line"/>The son of Atreus then bade many councilors of
    the Achaeans to his quarters prepared a great feast in their honor. They laid
    their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had
    enough to eat and drink, old Nestor, whose counsel was ever truest, was the
    first to lay his mind before them. He, therefore, with all sincerity and
    goodwill addressed them thus. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="96" unit="line"/>"With yourself, most noble son of Atreus, king
    of men, Agamemnon, will I both begin my speech and end it, for you are king
    over many people. Zeus, moreover, has granted you to wield the scepter and to
    uphold what is right [<term xml:lang="grc">themis</term>] that you may take
    thought for your people under you; therefore it behooves you above all others
    both to speak and to give ear, and to out the counsel of another who shall have
    been minded to speak wisely. All turns on you and on your commands, therefore I
    will say what I think will be best. No man will be of a truer mind [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] than that which has been mine from the hour when
    you, sir, angered Achilles by taking the girl Briseis from his tent against my
    judgment [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>].</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="108" unit="line"/>I urged you not to do so, but you yielded to
    your own pride, and dishonored a hero whom heaven itself had honored - for you
    still hold the prize that had been awarded to him. Now, however, let us think
    how we may appease him, both with presents and fair speeches that may
    conciliate him." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="115" unit="line"/>And King Agamemnon answered, "Sir, you have
    reproved my folly [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>] justly. I was wrong. I own
    it. One whom heaven befriends is in himself a host, and Zeus has shown that he
    befriends this man by destroying many people of the Achaeans. I was blinded
    with passion and yielded to my worser mind; therefore I will make amends, and
    will give him great gifts by way of atonement. I will tell them in the presence
    of you all. I will give him seven tripods that have never yet been on the fire,
    and ten talents of gold. I will give him twenty iron cauldrons and twelve
    strong horses that have won races and carried off prizes. Rich, indeed, both in
    land and gold is he that has as many prizes as my horses have won me. I will
    give him seven excellent workwomen, from <placeName key="tgn,7002672">Lesbos</placeName>, whom I chose for myself when he took Lesbos - all of
    surpassing beauty. I will give him these, and with them her whom I erewhile
    took from him, the daughter of Briseus; and I swear a great oath that I never
    went up into her couch, nor did I lie down with her, even though it is right
    [<term xml:lang="grc">themis</term>] for humans, both men and women, to do
    this. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="135" unit="line"/>"All these things will I give him now down, and
    if hereafter the gods grant me to sack the city of Priam, let him come when we
    Achaeans are dividing the spoil, and load his ship with gold and bronze to his
    liking; furthermore let him take twenty Trojan women, the loveliest after Helen
    herself. Then, when we reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all lands, he shall
    be my son-in-law and I will show him like honor with my own dear son Orestes,
    who is being nurtured in all abundance. I have three daughters, Chrysothemis,
    Laodike, and Iphianassa, let him take the one of his choice, freely and without
    gifts of wooing, to the house of Peleus;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="147" unit="line"/>I will add such dower to boot as no man ever
    yet gave his daughter, and will give him seven well established cities,
    <placeName key="perseus,Kardamyle">Kardamyle</placeName>, Enope, and Hire,
    where there is grass; holy <placeName key="perseus,Pherai">Pherai</placeName>
    and the fertile meadows of <placeName key="perseus,Anthea">Anthea</placeName>;
    Aipeia also, and the vine-clad slopes of Pedasos, all near the sea, and on the
    borders of sandy <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>. The men that
    dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honor him with gifts as
    though he were a god, and be obedient to his comfortable ordinances [<term xml:lang="grc">themistes</term>]. All this will I do if he will now forgo
    his anger. Let him then yield: it is only Hades who is utterly ruthless and
    unyielding - and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to humankind.
    Moreover I am older and more royal than himself. Therefore, let him now obey
    me." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="163" unit="line"/>Then Nestor answered, "Most noble son of
    Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon. The gifts you offer are no small ones, let us
    then send chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of Achilles son of Peleus
    without delay. Let those go whom I shall name. Let Phoenix, dear to Zeus, lead
    the way; let Ajax and Odysseus follow, and let the heralds Odios and Eurybates
    go with them. Now bring water for our hands, and bid all keep silence while we
    pray to Zeus the son of Kronos, if so be that he may have mercy upon us." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="173" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them
    well. Men-servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages
    filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
    every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings, and had
    drunk each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from the tent of
    Agamemnon son of Atreus; and Nestor, looking first to one and then to another,
    but most especially at Odysseus, was instant with them that they should prevail
    with the noble son of Peleus. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="182" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="182" unit="line"/>They went their way by the shore of the
    sounding sea, and prayed earnestly to earth-encircling Poseidon that the high
    spirit of the son of Aiakos might incline favorably towards them. When they
    reached the ships and tents of the Myrmidons,</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="186" unit="line"/>they found Achilles playing on a lyre, fair, of
    cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. It was part of the spoils
    which he had taken when he sacked the city of Eetion, and he was now diverting
    himself with it and singing the glories [<term xml:lang="grc">klea</term>] of
    heroes. Patroklos alone sat facing him, in silence, waiting till he should
    cease singing. Odysseus and Ajax now came in - Odysseus leading the way -and
    stood before him. Achilles sprang from his seat with the lyre still in his
    hand, and Patroklos, when he saw the strangers, rose also. Achilles then
    greeted them saying, "All hail and welcome - you must come upon some great
    matter, you, who for all my anger are still dearest to me of the Achaeans." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="199" unit="line"/>With this he led them forward, and bade them
    sit on seats covered with purple rugs; then he said to Patroklos who was close
    by him, "Son of Menoitios, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less water
    with the wine, and give every man his cup, for these are very dear friends, who
    are now under my roof." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="205" unit="line"/>Patroklos did as his comrade bade him; he set
    the chopping-block in front of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep,
    the loin also of a goat, and the chine of a fat hog. Automedon held the meat
    while Achilles chopped it; he then sliced the pieces and put them on spits
    while the son of Menoitios made the fire burn high. When the flame had died
    down, he spread the embers, laid the spits on top of them, lifting them up and
    setting them upon the spit-racks; and he sprinkled them with salt. When the
    meat was roasted, he set it on platters, and handed bread round the table in
    fair baskets, while Achilles dealt them their portions. Then Achilles took his
    seat facing Odysseus against the opposite wall, and bade his comrade Patroklos
    offer sacrifice to the gods; so he cast the offerings into the fire, and they
    laid their hands upon the good things that were before them. As soon as they
    had had enough to eat and drink, Ajax made a sign to Phoenix, and when he saw
    this, Odysseus filled his cup with wine and pledged Achilles. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="225" unit="line"/>"Hail," said he, "Achilles, we have had no
    scant of good cheer, neither in the tent of Agamemnon, nor yet here; there has
    been plenty to eat and drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. Sir,
    we are in the face of great disaster, and without your help know not whether we
    shall save our fleet or lose it. The Trojans and their allies have camped hard
    by our ships and by the wall; they have lit watchfires throughout their host
    and deem that nothing can now prevent them from falling on our fleet. Zeus,
    moreover, has sent his lightnings on the right side, as signs [<term xml:lang="grc">sêmata</term>]; Hektor, in all his glory, rages like a
    maniac; confident that Zeus is with him he fears neither god nor man, but is
    gone raving mad, and prays for the approach of day. He vows that he will hew
    the high sterns of our ships in pieces, set fire to their hulls, and make havoc
    of the Achaeans while they are dazed and smothered in smoke; I much fear that
    heaven will make good his boasting, and it will prove our lot to perish at
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> far from our home in
    <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>. Up, then, and late though
    it be, save the sons of the Achaeans who faint before the fury of the Trojans.
    You will have grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] hereafter for all time
    to come if you do not, for when the harm is done there will be no cure for it;
    consider ere it be too late, and save the Danaans from destruction. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="252" unit="line"/>"My good friend, when your father Peleus sent
    you from <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName> to Agamemnon, did
    he not charge you saying, ‘Son, Athena and Hera will make you strong if they
    choose, but check your high temper, for the better part is in goodwill. Eschew
    vain quarreling, and the Achaeans old and young will respect you more for doing
    so.’ These were his words, but you have forgotten them. Even now, however, be
    appeased, and put away your anger from you. Agamemnon will make you great
    amends if you will forgive him; listen, and I will tell you what he has said in
    his tent that he will give you. He will give you seven tripods that have never
    yet been on the fire, and ten talents of gold; twenty iron cauldrons, and
    twelve strong horses that have won races and carried off prizes.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="266" unit="line"/>Rich indeed both in land and gold is he who has
    as many prizes as these horses have won for Agamemnon. Moreover he will give
    you seven excellent workers, women of <placeName key="tgn,7002672">Lesbos</placeName>, whom he chose for himself, when you took Lesbos - all
    of surpassing beauty. He will give you these, and with them her whom he
    erewhile took from you, the daughter of Briseus, and he will swear a great
    oath, he has never gone up into her couch nor lain down with her, though it is
    right [<term xml:lang="grc">themis</term>] for men and women to do so. All
    these things will he give you now down, and if hereafter the gods grant him to
    sack the city of Priam, you can come when we Achaeans are dividing the spoil,
    and load your ship with gold and bronze to your liking. You can take twenty
    Trojan women, the loveliest after Helen herself. Then, when we reach Achaean
    Argos, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his son-in-law, and he will show
    you like honor with his own dear son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all
    abundance. Agamemnon has three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodike, and
    Iphianassa; you may take the one of your choice, freely and without gifts of
    wooing, to the house of Peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever
    yet gave his daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities,
    <placeName key="perseus,Kardamyle">Kardamyle</placeName>, Enope, and Hire
    where there is grass; holy Pheras and the fertile meadows of <placeName key="perseus,Anthea">Anthea</placeName>; Aipeia also, and the vine-clad
    slopes of Pedasos, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>. The men that dwell there are rich in
    cattle and sheep; they will honor you with gifts as though were a god, and be
    obedient to your comfortable ordinances [<term xml:lang="grc">themistes</term>]. All this will he do if you will now forgo your anger.
    Moreover, though you hate both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity
    the rest of the Achaeans who are being harassed in all their host; they will
    honor you as a god, and you will earn great glory at their hands. You might
    even kill Hektor; he will come within your reach, for he is infatuated, and
    declares that not a Danaan whom the ships have brought can hold his own against
    him." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="307" unit="line"/>Achilles answered, "Odysseus, noble son of
    <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, I should give you
    formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no more of
    this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. Hateful [<term xml:lang="grc">ekhthros</term>] to me like the gates of Hades is the man who
    says one thing while he hides another thing in his mind [<term xml:lang="grc">phrenes</term>]; therefore I will say what I mean. I will be appeased
    neither by Agamemnon son of Atreus nor by any other of the Danaans, for I see
    that I have no thanks [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>] for all my fighting.
    He that fights fares no better than he that does not; coward and hero are held
    in equal honor [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>], and death deals like measure
    to him who works and him who is idle. I have taken nothing by all my hardships
    - with my life [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] ever at risk; as a bird
    when she has found a morsel takes it to her nestlings, and herself fares
    hardly, even so many a long night have I been wakeful, and many a bloody battle
    have I waged by day against those who were fighting for their women. With my
    ships I have taken twelve cities, and eleven round about <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> have I stormed with my men by land; I
    took great store of wealth from every one of them, but I gave all up to
    Agamemnon son of Atreus. He stayed where he was by his ships, yet of what came
    to him he gave little, and kept much himself. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="334" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="334" unit="line"/>"Nevertheless he did distribute some prizes of
    honor among the chieftains and kings, and these have them still; from me alone
    of the Achaeans did he take the woman in whom I delighted - let him keep her
    and sleep with her. Why, pray, must the Argives needs fight the Trojans? What
    made the son of Atreus gather the host and bring them? Was it not for the sake
    of Helen? Are the sons of Atreus the only men in the world who love their
    wives? Any man of common right feeling will love and cherish her who is his
    own, as I this woman, with my whole heart, though she was but a fruitling of my
    spear. Agamemnon has taken her from me; he has played me false; I know him; let
    him tempt me no further, for he shall not move me. Let him look to you,
    Odysseus, and to the other princes to save his ships from burning.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="347" unit="line"/>He has done much without me already. He has
    built a wall; he has dug a trench deep and wide all round it, and he has
    planted it within with stakes; but even so he stays not the murderous might of
    Hektor. So long as I fought the Achaeans Hektor suffered not the battle range
    far from the city walls; he would come to the Scaean gates and to the oak tree,
    but no further. Once he stayed to meet me and hardly did he escape my onset:
    now, however, since I am in no mood to fight him, I will tomorrow offer
    sacrifice to Zeus and to all the gods; I will draw my ships into the water and
    then victual them duly; tomorrow morning, if you care to look, you will see my
    ships on the <placeName key="tgn,7002638">Hellespont</placeName>, and my men
    rowing out to sea with might and main. If great Poseidon grants me a fair
    passage, in three days I shall be in <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName>. I have much there that I left behind me when I came
    here to my sorrow, and I shall bring back still further store of gold, of red
    copper, of fair women, and of iron, my share of the spoils that we have taken;
    but one prize, he who gave has insolently taken away. Tell him all as I now bid
    you, and tell him in public that the Achaeans may hate him and beware of him
    should he think that he can yet dupe others for his effrontery never fails him. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="372" unit="line"/>"As for me, hound that he is, he dares not look
    me in the face. I will take no counsel with him, and will undertake nothing in
    common with him. He has wronged me and deceived me enough, he shall not cozen
    me further; let him go his own way, for Zeus has robbed him of his reason.
    Hateful [<term xml:lang="grc">ekhthra</term>] to me are his presents, and for
    himself care not one straw. He may offer me ten or even twenty times what he
    has now done, nay- not though it be all that he has in the world, both now or
    ever shall have; he may promise me the wealth of <placeName key="tgn,7011034">Orkhomenos</placeName> or of Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in
    the whole world, for it has a hundred gates through each of which two hundred
    men may drive at once with their chariots and horses;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="385" unit="line"/>he may offer me gifts as the sands of the sea
    or the dust of the plain in multitude, but even so he shall not move me till I
    have been revenged in full for the bitter wrong he has done me. I will not
    marry his daughter; she may be fair as Aphrodite, and skillful as Athena, but I
    will have none of her: let another take her, who may be a good match for her
    and who rules a larger kingdom. If the gods spare me to return home, Peleus
    will find me a wife; there are Achaean women in <placeName key="tgn,1000074">Hellas</placeName> and <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName>,
    daughters of kings that have cities under them; of these I can take whom I will
    and marry her. Many a time was I minded when at home in <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName> to woo and wed a woman who would
    make me a suitable wife, and to enjoy the riches of my old father Peleus. My
    life [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] means more to me than all the wealth
    of <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName> while it was yet at peace
    before the Achaeans went there, or than all the treasure that lies on the stone
    floor of Apollo's temple beneath the cliffs of <placeName key="tgn,7010770">Pytho</placeName>. Cattle and sheep are to be had for harrying, and a man
    buy both tripods and horses if he wants them, but when his life has once left
    him it can neither be bought nor harried back again. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="410" unit="line"/>"My mother Thetis tells me that there are two
    ways in which I may meet my end [<term xml:lang="grc">telos</term>]. If I stay
    here and fight, I shall lose my safe homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] but I will have a glory [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>]
    that is unwilting: whereas if I go home my glory [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] will die, but it will be a long time before the outcome
    [<term xml:lang="grc">telos</term>] of death shall take me. To the rest of
    you, then, I say, ‘Go home, for you will not take <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>.’ Zeus has held his hand over her to protect her, and her
    people have taken heart. Go, therefore, as in duty bound, and tell the princes
    of the Achaeans the message that I have sent them; tell them to find some other
    plan for the saving of their ships and people, for so long as my displeasure
    lasts the one that they have now hit upon may not be. As for Phoenix, let him
    sleep here that he may sail with me in the morning if he so will. But I will
    not take him by force." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="430" unit="line"/>They all held their peace, dismayed at the
    sternness with which he had denied them, till presently the old horseman
    Phoenix in his great fear for the ships of the Achaeans, burst into tears and
    said, "Noble Achilles, if you are now minded to have your homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>], and in the fierceness of your anger will do
    nothing to save the ships from burning, how, my son, can I remain here without
    you? Your father Peleus bade me go with you when he sent you as a mere lad from
    <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName> to Agamemnon. You knew
    nothing neither of war nor of the arts whereby men make their mark in council,
    and he sent me with you to train you in all excellence of speech and action.
    Therefore, my son, I will not stay here without you - no, not though heaven
    itself grant to strip my years from off me, and make me young as I was when I
    first left <placeName key="tgn,1000074">Hellas</placeName> the land of fair
    women. I was then fleeing the anger of father Amyntor, son of Ormenus, who was
    furious with me in the matter of his concubine, of whom he was enamored to the
    wronging of his wife my mother. My mother, therefore, prayed me without ceasing
    to lie with the woman myself, that so she hate my father, and in the course of
    time I yielded. But my father soon came to know, and cursed me bitterly,
    calling the dread Erinyes to witness. He prayed that no son of mine might ever
    sit upon knees - and the gods, Zeus of the world below and awful Persephone,
    fulfilled his curse. I took counsel to kill him, but some god stayed my
    rashness and bade me think on men's evil tongues and how I should be branded as
    the murderer of my father: nevertheless I could not bear to stay in my father's
    house with him so bitter a against me. My cousins and clansmen came about me,
    and pressed me sorely to remain; many a sheep and many an ox did they
    slaughter, and many a fat hog did they set down to roast before the fire; many
    a jar, too, did they broach of my father's wine. Nine whole nights did they set
    a guard over me taking it in turns to watch, and they kept a fire always
    burning, both in the room of the outer court and in the inner court at the
    doors of the room wherein I lay;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="474" unit="line"/>but when the darkness of the tenth night came,
    I broke through the closed doors of my room, and climbed the wall of the outer
    court after passing quickly and unperceived through the men on guard and the
    women servants. I then fled through <placeName key="tgn,1000074">Hellas</placeName> till I came to fertile <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName>, mother of sheep, and to King Peleus, who made me
    welcome and treated me as a father treats an only son who will be heir to all
    his wealth. He made me rich and set me over many people, establishing me on the
    borders of <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName> where I was chief
    ruler over the Dolopians. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="485" unit="line"/>"It was I, Achilles, who had the making of you;
    I loved you with all my heart: for you would eat neither at home nor when you
    had gone out elsewhere, till I had first set you upon my knees, cut up the
    dainty morsel that you were to eat, and held the wine-cup to your lips. Many a
    time have you slobbered your wine in baby helplessness over my shirt; I had
    infinite trouble with you, but I knew that heaven had granted me no offspring
    of my own, and I made a son of you, Achilles, that in my hour of need you might
    protect me. Now, therefore, I say battle with your pride and beat it; cherish
    not your anger for ever; the excellence [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>] and
    might [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] and honor [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>] of the gods are more than ours, but even gods may be appeased;
    and if a man has erred he prays the gods, and reconciles them to himself by his
    piteous cries and by frankincense, with drink-offerings and the savor of burnt
    sacrifice. For prayers are as daughters to great Zeus; halt, wrinkled, with
    eyes askance, they follow in the footsteps of Derangement [<term xml:lang="grc">Atê</term>], who, being fierce and fleet of foot, leaves them far behind
    him, and ever baneful to humankind outstrips them even to the ends of the
    world; but nevertheless the prayers come hobbling and healing after. If a man
    has pity upon these daughters of Zeus when they draw near him, they will bless
    him and hear him too when he is praying; but if he deny them and will not
    listen to them, they go to Zeus the son of Kronos and pray that he may
    presently fall into derangement [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>] - to his
    ruing bitterly hereafter.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="513" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="513" unit="line"/>Therefore, Achilles, give these daughters of
    Zeus due reverence [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>], just as every other
    person does whose mind [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] they change. Were not
    the son of Atreus offering you gifts and promising others later - if he were
    still furious and implacable - I am not he that would bid you throw off your
    anger [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>] and help the Achaeans, no matter how
    great their need; but he is giving much now, and more hereafter; he has sent
    his leading men to urge his suit, and has chosen [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] those who of all the Argives are most near-and-dear [<term xml:lang="grc">philoi</term>] to you; make not then their words and their
    coming to be of no effect. Your anger has been righteous so far. We have heard
    in song the glories [<term xml:lang="grc">klea</term>] of heroes of old time:
    how they quarreled when they were roused to fury, but still they could be won
    by gifts, and fair words could soothe them. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="527" unit="line"/>"I totally recall [<term xml:lang="grc">memnêmai</term>] this event of the past - it is not a new thing - and how
    it happened. You are all near and dear [<term xml:lang="grc">philoi</term>],
    and I will tell it in your presence. The Curetes and the Aetolians were
    fighting and killing one another round Calydon - the Aetolians defending the
    city and the Curetes trying to destroy it. For Artemis of the golden throne was
    angry and did them hurt because Oeneus had not offered her his harvest
    first-fruits. The other gods had all been feasted with hecatombs, but to the
    daughter of great Zeus alone he had made no sacrifice. He had forgotten her, or
    somehow or other it had escaped him, and this was a grievous derangement.
    Thereon the archer goddess in her displeasure sent a prodigious creature
    against him - a savage wild boar with great white tusks that did much harm to
    his orchard lands, uprooting apple-trees in full bloom and throwing them to the
    ground. But Meleager son of Oeneus got huntsmen and hounds from many cities and
    killed it - for it was so monstrous that not a few were needed, and many a man
    did it stretch upon his funeral pyre. On this the goddess set the Curetes and
    the Aetolians fighting furiously about the head and skin of the boar. "So long
    as Meleager was in the field things went badly with the Curetes, and for all
    their numbers they could not hold their ground under the city walls; but in the
    course of time the anger weighed heavy on the thinking [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] of Meleager : this can sometimes happen even to a sensible
    man.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="555" unit="line"/>He was incensed with his mother Althaia, and
    therefore stayed at home with his wedded wife fair Cleopatra, who was daughter
    of Marpessa daughter of Euenos, and of Ides the man then living. He it was who
    took his bow and faced King Apollo himself for fair Marpessa's sake; her father
    and mother then named her Halcyone, because her mother had mourned with the
    strains of the halcyon, bird of much grief [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>], when Phoebus Apollo had carried her off. Meleager, then,
    stayed at home with Cleopatra, nursing the anger which he felt by reason of his
    mother's curses. His mother, grieving for the death of her brother, prayed the
    gods, and beat the earth with her hands, calling upon Hades and on awful
    Persephone; she went down upon her knees and her bosom was wet with tears as
    she prayed that they would kill her son - and Erinys that walks in darkness and
    knows no ruth heard her from Erebos. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="573" unit="line"/>"Then was heard the din of battle about the
    gates of Calydon, and the dull thump of the battering against their walls.
    Thereon the elders of the Aetolians besought Meleager; they sent the chiefest
    of their priests, and begged him to come out and help them, promising him a
    great reward. They bade him choose fifty plough-gates, the most fertile in the
    plain of Calydon, the one-half vineyard and the other open plough-land. The old
    warrior Oeneus implored him, standing at the threshold of his room and beating
    the doors in supplication. His sisters and his mother herself besought him
    sore, but he the more refused them; those of his comrades who were nearest and
    dearest to him also prayed him, but they could not move him till the foe was
    battering at the very doors of his chamber, and the Curetes had scaled the
    walls and were setting fire to the city. Then at last his sorrowing wife
    detailed the horrors that befall those whose city is taken; she reminded him
    how the men are slain, and the city is given over to the flames, while the
    women and children are carried into captivity;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="595" unit="line"/>when he heard all this, his heart was touched,
    and he donned his armor to go forth. Thus of his own inward motion he saved the
    city of the Aetolians; but they now gave him nothing of those rich rewards that
    they had offered earlier, and though he saved the city he took nothing by it.
    Be not then, my son, thus minded; let not heaven lure you into any such course.
    When the ships are burning it will be a harder matter to save them. Take the
    gifts, and go, for the Achaeans will then honor you as a god [<term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term>]; whereas if you fight without taking them, you
    may beat the battle back, but you will not be held in like honor [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>]." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="606" unit="line"/>And Achilles answered, "Phoenix, old friend and
    foster-father, I have no need of such honor. I have honor [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>] from Zeus himself, which will abide with me at my ships while
    I have breath in my body, and my limbs are strong. I say further - and lay my
    saying to your heart - vex me no more with this weeping and lamentation, all to
    do a favor [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>] for the son of Atreus. Love him
    so well, and you may lose the love I bear you. You ought to help me rather in
    troubling those that trouble me; be king as much as I am, and share like honor
    [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>] with myself; the others shall take my
    answer; stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak we
    will consider whether to remain or go." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="620" unit="line"/>On this he nodded quietly to Patroklos as a
    sign that he was to prepare a bed for Phoenix, and that the others should take
    their leave [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]. Ajax son of Telamon then
    said, "Odysseus, noble son of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, let us be gone, for I see that our journey is vain. We
    must now take our answer, unwelcome though it be, to the Danaans who are
    waiting to receive it. Achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and
    cares nothing for the affection [<term xml:lang="grc">philotês</term>] that his
    comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. He is implacable - and
    yet if a man's brother or son has been slain he will accept a fine by way of
    amends from him that killed him, and the wrong-doer having paid in full remains
    in peace in his own district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>]; but as for
    you, Achilles, the gods have put a wicked unforgiving spirit [<term xml:lang="grc">thumos</term>] in your breast, and this, all about one single
    girl,</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="638" unit="line"/>whereas we now offer you the seven best we
    have, and much else into the bargain. Be then of a more gracious mind, respect
    the hospitality of your own roof. We are with you as messengers from the host
    of the Danaans, and would fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all
    the Achaeans." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:9"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="644" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="644" unit="line"/>"Ajax," replied Achilles, "noble son of
    Telamon, you have spoken much to my liking, but my blood boils when I think it
    all over, and remember how the son of Atreus treated me with contumely as
    though I were some vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the Argives. Go,
    then, and deliver your message; say that I will have no concern with fighting
    till Hektor, son of noble Priam, reaches the tents of the Myrmidons in his
    murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. For all his lust of battle,
    I take it he will be held in check when he is at my own tent and ship." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="656" unit="line"/>On this they took every man his double cup,
    made their drink-offerings, and went back to the ships, Odysseus leading the
    way. But Patroklos told his men and the maid-servants to make ready a
    comfortable bed for Phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and
    a sheet of fine linen. The old man then laid himself down and waited till
    morning came. But Achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter
    of Phorbas lovely Diomede, whom he had carried off from <placeName key="tgn,7002672">Lesbos</placeName>. Patroklos lay on the other side of the
    room, and with him fair Iphis whom Achilles had given him when he took
    <placeName key="tgn,1009188">Skyros</placeName> the city of Enyeus. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="669" unit="line"/>When the envoys reached the tents of the son of
    Atreus, the Achaeans rose, pledged them in cups of gold, and began to question
    them. King Agamemnon was the first to do so. Tell me, Odysseus," said he, "will
    he save the ships from burning, or did be refuse, and is he still furious?" </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="677" unit="line"/>Odysseus answered, "Most noble son of Atreus,
    king of men, Agamemnon, Achilles will not be calmed, but is more fiercely angry
    than ever, and spurns both you and your gifts. He bids you take counsel with
    the Achaeans to save the ships and host as you best may;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="681" unit="line"/>as for himself, he said that at daybreak he
    should draw his ships into the water. He said further that he should advise
    every one to sail home likewise, for that you will not reach the goal of
    <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>. ‘Zeus,’ he said, ‘has laid
    his hand over the city to protect it, and the people have taken heart.’ This is
    what he said, and the others who were with me can tell you the same story -
    Ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them, who may be trusted. The old man
    Phoenix stayed where he was to sleep, for so Achilles would have it, that he
    might go home with him in the morning if he so would; but he will not take him
    by force." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="692" unit="line"/>They all held their peace, sitting for a long
    time silent and dejected, by reason of the sternness with which Achilles had
    refused them, till presently Diomedes said, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of
    men, Agamemnon, you ought not to have sued the son of Peleus nor offered him
    gifts. He is proud enough as it is, and you have encouraged him in his pride am
    further. Let him stay or go as he will. He will fight later when he is in the
    humor, and heaven puts it in his mind to do so. Now, therefore, let us all do
    as I say; we have eaten and drunk our fill, let us then take our rest, for in
    rest there is both strength and stay. But when fair rosy-fingered morn appears,
    forthwith bring out your host and your horsemen in front of the ships, urging
    them on, and yourself fighting among the foremost." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="710" unit="line"/>Thus he spoke, and the other chieftains
    approved his words. They then made their drink-offerings and went every man to
    his own tent, where they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of
    sleep.<milestone n="713" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

