+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Sing, O goddess, the anger [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>] of Achilles son of Peleus, that brought countless ills upon
    the Achaeans. Many a brave soul [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] did it
    send hurrying down to Hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="5" unit="line"/>and vultures, for so was the will of Zeus
    fulfilled from the day on which the son of Atreus, king of men, and great
    Achilles, first fell out with one another. And which of the gods was it that
    set them on to quarrel? It was the son of Zeus and Leto; for he was angry with
    the king </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="10" unit="line"/>and sent a pestilence upon the host to plague
    the people, because the son of Atreus had dishonored Chryses his priest. Now
    Chryses had come to the ships of the Achaeans to free his daughter, and had
    brought with him a great ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the scepter of
    Apollo wreathed with a suppliant's wreath </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="15" unit="line"/>and he besought the Achaeans, but most of all
    the two sons of Atreus, who were their chiefs. "Sons of Atreus," he cried, "and
    all other Achaeans, may the gods who dwell in <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> grant you to sack the city of Priam, and to reach your
    homes in safety; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="20" unit="line"/>but free my daughter, and accept a ransom for
    her, in reverence to Apollo, son of Zeus." On this the rest of the Achaeans
    with one voice were for respecting the priest and taking the ransom that he
    offered; but not so Agamemnon, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="25" unit="line"/>who spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly
    away. "Old man," said he, "let me not find you tarrying about our ships, nor
    yet coming hereafter. Your scepter of the god and your wreath shall profit you
    nothing. I will not free her. She shall grow old </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="30" unit="line"/>in my house at <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName> far from her own home, busying herself with her loom and
    visiting my couch; so go, and do not provoke me or it shall be the worse for
    you." The old man feared him and obeyed. Not a word he spoke, but went by the
    shore of the sounding sea </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="35" unit="line"/>and prayed apart to King Apollo whom lovely Leto
    had borne. "Hear me," he cried, "O god of the silver bow, you who protect
    <placeName key="perseus,Chryse">Chryse</placeName> and holy Cilla and rule
    <placeName key="perseus,Tenedos">Tenedos</placeName> with your might, hear
    me O god of Sminthe. If I have ever decked your temple with garlands, </p>
</div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="40" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="40" unit="line"/>or burned for you thigh-bones in fat of bulls or
    goats, grant my prayer, and let your arrows avenge these my tears upon the
    Danaans." Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He came down furious
    from the summits of <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="45" unit="line"/>with his bow and his quiver upon his shoulder,
    and the arrows rattled on his back with the rage that trembled within him. He
    sat himself down away from the ships with a face as dark as night, and his
    silver bow rang death as he shot his arrow in the midst of them. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="50" unit="line"/>First he smote their mules and their hounds, but
    presently he aimed his shafts at the people themselves, and all day long the
    pyres of the dead were burning. For nine whole days he shot his arrows among
    the people, but upon the tenth day Achilles called them in assembly - </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="55" unit="line"/>moved thereto by Hera, who saw the Achaeans in
    their death-throes and had compassion upon them. Then, when they were got
    together, he rose and spoke among them. "Son of Atreus," said he, "I deem that
    we should now </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="60" unit="line"/>turn roving home if we would escape destruction,
    for we are being cut down by war and pestilence at once. Let us ask some priest
    or seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>], or some reader of dreams (for
    dreams, too, are of Zeus) who can tell us why Phoebus Apollo is so angry, and
    say </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="65" unit="line"/>whether it is for some vow that we have broken,
    or hecatomb that we have not offered, and whether he will accept the savor of
    lambs and goats without blemish, so as to take away the plague from us." With
    these words he sat down, and Kalkhas son of Thestor, wisest of augurs, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="70" unit="line"/>who knew things past present and to come, rose
    to speak. He it was who had guided the Achaeans with their fleet to <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>, through the prophesyings with which
    Phoebus Apollo had inspired him. With all sincerity and goodwill he addressed
    them thus: - "Achilles, loved of heaven, you bid me tell you about the </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="75" unit="line"/>anger [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>] of
    King Apollo, I will therefore do so; but consider first and swear that you will
    stand by me heartily in word and deed, for I know that I shall offend one who
    rules the Argives with might, to whom all the Achaeans are in subjection. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="80" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="80" unit="line"/>A plain man cannot stand against the anger of a
    king, who if he swallow his displeasure now, will yet nurse revenge till he has
    wreaked it. Consider, therefore, whether or no you will protect me." And
    Achilles answered, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="85" unit="line"/>"Fear not, but speak as it is borne in upon you
    from heaven, for by Apollo, Kalkhas, to whom you pray, and whose oracles you
    reveal to us, not a Danaan at our ships shall lay his hand upon you, while I
    yet live to look upon the face of the earth - </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="90" unit="line"/>no, not though you name Agamemnon himself, who
    is by far the foremost of the Achaeans." Thereon the seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>] spoke boldly. "The god," he said, "is angry neither about
    vow nor hecatomb, but for his priest's sake, whom Agamemnon has dishonored, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="95" unit="line"/>in that he would not free his daughter nor take
    a ransom for her; therefore has he sent these evils upon us, and will yet send
    others. He will not deliver the Danaans from this pestilence till Agamemnon has
    restored the girl without fee or ransom to her father, and has sent a holy
    hecatomb </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="100" unit="line"/>to <placeName key="perseus,Chryse">Chryse</placeName>. Thus we may perhaps appease him." With these words he
    sat down, and Agamemnon rose in anger. His heart was black with rage, and his
    eyes flashed fire </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="105" unit="line"/>as he scowled on Kalkhas and said, "Seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>] of evil, you never yet prophesied smooth
    things concerning me, but have ever loved to foretell that which was evil. You
    have brought me neither comfort nor performance; and now you come seeing among
    Danaans, and saying </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="110" unit="line"/>that Apollo has plagued us because I would not
    take a ransom for this girl, the daughter of Chryses. I have set my heart on
    keeping her in my own house, for I love her better even than my own wife
    Clytemnestra, whose peer she is alike in </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="115" unit="line"/>form and feature, in understanding and
    accomplishments. Still I will give her up if I must, for I would have the
    people live, not die; but you must find me a prize instead, or I alone among
    the Argives shall be without one. This is not well; </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="120" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="120" unit="line"/>for you behold, all of you, that my prize is to
    go elsewhere." And Achilles answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, covetous
    beyond all humankind, how shall the Achaeans find you another prize? We have no
    common store from which to take one. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="125" unit="line"/>Those we took from the cities have been
    awarded; we cannot disallow the awards that have been made already. Give this
    girl, therefore, to the god, and if ever Zeus grants us to sack the city of
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> we will requite you three and
    fourfold." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="130" unit="line"/>Then Agamemnon said, "Achilles, valiant though
    you be, you shall not thus get the better of me in matters of the mind [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>]. You shall not overreach and you shall not
    persuade me. Are you to keep your own prize, while I sit tamely under my loss
    and give up the girl at your bidding? </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="135" unit="line"/>Let the Achaeans find me a prize in fair
    exchange to my liking, or I will come and take your own, or that of Ajax or of
    Odysseus; and he to whomsoever I may come shall rue my coming. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="140" unit="line"/>But of this we will take thought hereafter; for
    the present, let us draw a ship into the sea, and find a crew for her
    expressly; let us put a hecatomb on board, and let us send Chryseis also;
    further, let some chief man among us be in command, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="145" unit="line"/>either Ajax, or Idomeneus, or yourself, son of
    Peleus, mighty warrior that you are, that we may offer sacrifice and appease
    the anger of the god." Achilles scowled at him and answered, "You are steeped
    in insolence and lust of gain. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="150" unit="line"/>With what heart can any of the Achaeans do your
    bidding, either on foray or in open fighting? I came to make war here not
    because the Trojans are responsible [<term xml:lang="grc">aitioi</term>] for
    any wrong committed against me. I have no quarrel with them. They have not
    raided my cattle nor my horses, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="155" unit="line"/>nor cut down my harvests on the fertile plains
    of <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName>; for between me and them
    there is a great space, both mountain and sounding sea. We have followed you,
    Sir Insolence! for your pleasure, not ours - to gain satisfaction [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>] from the Trojans for your shameless self and for
    Menelaos. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="160" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="160" unit="line"/>You forget this, and threaten to rob me of the
    prize for which I have toiled, and which the sons of the Achaeans have given
    me. Never when the Achaeans sack any rich city of the Trojans do I receive so
    good a prize as you do, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="165" unit="line"/>though it is my hands that do the better part
    of the fighting. When the sharing comes, your share is far the largest, and I,
    indeed, must go back to my ships, take what I can get and be thankful, when my
    labor of fighting is done. Now, therefore, I shall go back to <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName>; it will be much better </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="170" unit="line"/>for me to return home with my ships, for I will
    not stay here dishonored to gather gold and substance for you." And Agamemnon
    answered, "Flee if you will, I shall make you no prayers to stay you. I have
    others here </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="175" unit="line"/>who will do me honor, and above all Zeus, the
    lord of counsel. There is no king here so hateful to me as you are, for you are
    ever quarrelsome and ill affected. What though you be brave? Was it not heaven
    that made you so? Go home, then, with your ships and comrades </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="180" unit="line"/>to lord it over the Myrmidons. I care neither
    for you nor for your anger; and thus will I do: since Phoebus Apollo is taking
    Chryseis from me, I shall send her with my ship and my followers, but I shall
    come to your tent and </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="185" unit="line"/>take your own prize Briseis, that you may learn
    how much more prestigious I am than you are, and that another may fear to set
    himself up as equal or comparable with me." The son of Peleus felt grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>], and his heart within his shaggy breast was
    divided </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="190" unit="line"/>whether to draw his sword, push the others
    aside, and kill the son of Atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger.
    While he was thus in two minds, and was drawing his mighty sword from its
    scabbard, Athena came down </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="200" unit="line"/>from heaven (for Hera had sent her in the love
    she bore to them both), and seized the son of Peleus by his yellow hair,
    visible to him alone, for of the others no man could see her. Achilles turned
    in amaze, and by the fire that flashed from her eyes at once knew that she was
    </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="200" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="200" unit="line"/>Athena. "Why are you here," said he, "daughter
    of aegis-bearing Zeus? To see the pride [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>] of
    Agamemnon, son of Atreus? Let me tell you - and it shall surely be - </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="205" unit="line"/>he shall pay for this insolence with his life."
    And Athena said, "I come from heaven, if you will hear me, to bid you stay your
    anger. Hera has sent me, who cares for both of you alike. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="210" unit="line"/>Cease, then, this brawling, and do not draw
    your sword; rail at him if you will, and your railing will not be vain, for I
    tell you - and it shall surely be - that you shall hereafter receive gifts
    three times as splendid by reason of this present insult [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>]. Hold, therefore, and obey." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="215" unit="line"/>"Goddess," answered Achilles, "however angry a
    man may be, he must do as you two command him. This will be best, for the gods
    ever hear the prayers of him who has obeyed them." He stayed his hand on the
    silver hilt of his sword, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="220" unit="line"/>and thrust it back into the scabbard as Athena
    bade him. Then she went back to <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> among the other gods [<term xml:lang="grc">daimones</term>], and to the house of aegis-bearing Zeus. But the son of
    Peleus again began railing at the son of Atreus, for he was still in a rage. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="225" unit="line"/>"Wine-bibber," he cried, "with the face of a
    dog and the heart of a hind, you never dare to go out with the host in fight,
    nor yet with our chosen men in ambuscade. You shun this as you do death itself.
    You had rather go round and </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="230" unit="line"/>rob his prizes from any man who contradicts
    you. You devour your people, for you are king over a feeble folk; otherwise,
    son of Atreus, henceforward you would insult no man. Therefore I say, and swear
    it with a great oath - nay, by this my scepter which shall sprout neither leaf
    nor shoot, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="235" unit="line"/>nor bud anew from the day on which it left its
    parent stem upon the mountains - for the axe stripped it of leaf and bark, and
    now the sons of the Achaeans bear it as judges and guardians of the decrees
    [<term xml:lang="grc">themistes</term>] of heaven - so surely and solemnly
    do I swear </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="240" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="240" unit="line"/>that hereafter they shall look fondly for
    Achilles and shall not find him. In the day of your distress, when your men
    fall dying by the murderous hand of Hektor, you shall not know how to help
    them, and shall rend your heart with rage for the hour when you offered insult
    to the best [<term xml:lang="grc">aristos</term>] of the Achaeans." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="245" unit="line"/>With this the son of Peleus dashed his
    gold-bestudded scepter on the ground and took his seat, while the son of Atreus
    was beginning fiercely from his place upon the other side. Then stood up
    smooth-tongued Nestor, the facile speaker of the Pylians, and the words fell
    from his lips sweeter than honey. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="250" unit="line"/>Two generations of men born and bred in
    <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> had passed away under his
    rule, and he was now reigning over the third. With all sincerity and goodwill,
    therefore, he addressed them thus: - "Of a truth," he said, "a great sorrow
    [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>] has befallen the Achaean land. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="255" unit="line"/>Surely Priam with his sons would rejoice, and
    the Trojans be glad at heart if they could hear this quarrel between you two,
    who are so excellent in fight and counsel. I am older than either of you;
    therefore be guided by me. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="260" unit="line"/>Moreover I have been the familiar friend of men
    even greater than you are, and they did not disregard my counsels. Never again
    can I behold such men as Peirithoos and Dryas shepherd of his people, or as
    Kaineus, Exadios, godlike Polyphemus, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="265" unit="line"/>and Theseus son of Aegeus, peer of the
    immortals. These were the mightiest men ever born upon this earth: mightiest
    were they, and when they fought the fiercest tribes of mountain savages they
    utterly overthrew them. I came from distant <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>, and went about among them, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="270" unit="line"/>for they would have me come, and I fought as it
    was in me to do. Not a man now living could withstand them, but they heard my
    words, and were persuaded by them. So be it also with yourselves, for this is
    the more excellent way. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="275" unit="line"/>Therefore, Agamemnon, though you be
    prestigious, take not this girl away, for the sons of the Achaeans have already
    given her to Achilles; and you, Achilles, strive not further with the king, for
    no man who by the grace of Zeus wields a scepter has like honor [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>] with Agamemnon. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="280" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="280" unit="line"/>You are strong, and have a goddess for your
    mother; but Agamemnon is more prestigious than you, for he has more people
    under him. Son of Atreus, check your anger, I implore you; end this quarrel
    with Achilles, who in the day of battle is a tower of strength to the
    Achaeans." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="285" unit="line"/>And Agamemnon answered, "Old sir, all that you
    have said is true, but this man wants to become our lord and master: he must be
    lord of all, king of all, and leader of all, and this shall hardly be. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="290" unit="line"/>Granted that the gods have made him a great
    warrior, have they also given him the right to speak with railing?" Achilles in
    turn said to him: "I should be a mean coward," he cried, "were I to give in to
    you in all things. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="295" unit="line"/>Order other people about, not me, for I shall
    obey no longer. Furthermore I say - and lay my saying to your heart - I shall
    fight neither you nor any man about this girl, for those that take were those
    also that gave. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="300" unit="line"/>But of all else that is at my ship you shall
    carry away nothing by force. Try, that others may see; if you do, my spear
    shall be reddened with your blood." When they had quarreled thus angrily, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="305" unit="line"/>they rose, and broke up the assembly at the
    ships of the Achaeans. The son of Peleus went back to his tents and ships with
    the son of Menoitios and his company, while Agamemnon drew a vessel into the
    water and chose a crew of twenty oarsmen. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="310" unit="line"/>He escorted Chryseis on board and sent moreover
    a hecatomb for the god. And Odysseus went as leader. These, then, went on board
    and sailed their ways over the sea. But the son of Atreus bade the people
    purify themselves; so they purified themselves and cast their filth into the
    sea. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="315" unit="line"/>Then they offered hecatombs of bulls and goats
    without blemish on the sea-shore, and the smoke with the savor of their
    sacrifice rose curling up towards heaven. Thus did they busy themselves
    throughout the host. But Agamemnon did not forget the threat that he had made
    Achilles, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="320" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="320" unit="line"/>and called his trusty messengers and squires
    [<term xml:lang="grc">therapontes</term>] Talthybios and Eurybates. "Go,"
    said he, "to the tent of Achilles, son of Peleus; take Briseis by the hand and
    bring her hither; if he will not give her I shall come </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="325" unit="line"/>with others and take her - which will press him
    harder." He charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they
    went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents and
    ships of the Myrmidons. They found Achilles sitting by his tent and his ships, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="330" unit="line"/>and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them.
    They stood fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they
    speak, but he knew them and said, "Welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and
    men; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="335" unit="line"/>draw near; my quarrel is not with you but with
    Agamemnon who has sent you for the girl Briseis. Therefore, Patroklos, bring
    her and give her to them, but let them be witnesses by the blessed gods, by
    mortal men, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="340" unit="line"/>and by the fierceness of Agamemnon's anger,
    that if ever again there be need of me to save the people from ruin, they shall
    seek and they shall not find. Agamemnon is mad with rage and knows not how to
    look before and after that the Achaeans may fight by their ships in safety." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="345" unit="line"/>Patroklos did as his dear comrade had bidden
    him. He brought Briseis from the tent and gave her over to the heralds, who
    took her with them to the ships of the Achaeans - and the woman was loath to
    go. Then Achilles went all alone </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="350" unit="line"/>by the side of the hoar sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>], weeping and looking out upon the boundless
    waste of waters. He raised his hands in prayer to his immortal mother,
    "Mother," he cried, "you bore me doomed to live but for a brief season; surely
    Zeus, who thunders from <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, might
    have given honor [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>] in return. It is not so. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="355" unit="line"/>Agamemnon, son of Atreus, has done me dishonor,
    and has robbed me of my prize by force." As he spoke he wept aloud, and his
    mother heard him where she was sitting in the depths of the sea hard by the Old
    One, her father. Forthwith she rose as it were a gray mist out of the waves,
    </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="360" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="360" unit="line"/>sat down before him as he stood weeping,
    caressed him with her hand, and said, "My son, why are you weeping? What is it
    that gives you grief [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>]? Keep it not from my
    thinking [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>], but tell me, that we may know it
    together." Achilles drew a deep sigh and said, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="365" unit="line"/>"You know it; why tell you what you know well
    already? We went to Thebe the strong city of Eetion, sacked it, and brought
    hither the spoil. The sons of the Achaeans shared it duly among themselves, and
    chose lovely Chryseis as the prize of Agamemnon; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="370" unit="line"/>but Chryses, priest of Apollo, came to the
    ships of the Achaeans to free his daughter, and brought with him a great
    ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the scepter of Apollo, wreathed with a
    suppliant's wreath, and he besought the Achaeans, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="375" unit="line"/>but most of all the two sons of Atreus who were
    their chiefs. On this the rest of the Achaeans with one voice were for
    respecting the priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so
    Agamemnon, who spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="380" unit="line"/>So he went back in anger, and Apollo, who loved
    him dearly, heard his prayer. Then the god sent a deadly dart upon the Argives,
    and the people died thick on one another, for the arrows went everywhere among
    the wide host of the Achaeans. At last a seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>] </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="385" unit="line"/>in the fullness of his knowledge declared to us
    the oracles of Apollo, and I was myself first to say that we should appease
    him. Whereon the son of Atreus rose in anger, and threatened that which he has
    since done. The Achaeans are now taking the girl in a ship </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="390" unit="line"/>to <placeName key="perseus,Chryse">Chryse</placeName>, and sending gifts of sacrifice to the god; but the
    heralds have just taken from my tent the daughter of Briseus, whom the Achaeans
    had awarded to myself. Help your brave son, therefore, if you are able. Go to
    <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, and if you have ever </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="395" unit="line"/>done him service in word or deed, implore the
    aid of Zeus. Ofttimes in my father's house have I heard you glory in that you
    alone of the immortals saved the son of Kronos from ruin, when the others, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="400" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="400" unit="line"/>with Hera, Poseidon, and Pallas Athena would
    have put him in bonds. It was you, goddess, who delivered him by calling to
    <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> the hundred-handed one whom
    gods call Briareus, but men Aigaion, for he has more force [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] even than his father; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="405" unit="line"/>when therefore he took his seat all-glorious
    beside the son of Kronos, the other gods were afraid, and did not bind him. Go,
    then, to him, remind him of all this, clasp his knees, and bid him give succor
    to the Trojans. Let the Achaeans be hemmed in at the sterns of their ships, and
    perish on the sea-shore, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="410" unit="line"/>that they may reap what joy they may of their
    king, and that Agamemnon may rue his derangement [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>] in offering insult to the best [<term xml:lang="grc">aristos</term>] of the Achaeans." Thetis wept and answered, "My son, woe is
    me that I should have borne or suckled you. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="415" unit="line"/>Would indeed that you had lived your span free
    from all sorrow at your ships, for it is all too brief; alas, that you should
    be at once short of life and long of sorrow above your peers: woe, therefore,
    was the hour in which I bore you; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="420" unit="line"/>nevertheless I will go to the snowy heights of
    <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, and tell this tale to
    Zeus, if he will hear our prayer: meanwhile stay where you are with your ships,
    nurse your anger [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>] against the Achaeans, and
    hold aloof from fight. For Zeus went yesterday to Okeanos, to a feast among the
    Ethiopians, and the other gods went with him. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="425" unit="line"/>He will return to <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> twelve days hence; I will then go to his mansion paved
    with bronze and will beseech him; nor do I doubt that I shall be able to
    persuade him." On this she left him, still furious at the loss of her </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="430" unit="line"/>that had been taken by force [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] from him. Meanwhile Odysseus reached <placeName key="perseus,Chryse">Chryse</placeName> with the hecatomb. When they had
    come inside the harbor they furled the sails and laid them in the ship's hold;
    they slackened the forestays, lowered the mast into its place, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="435" unit="line"/>and rowed the ship to the place where they
    would have her lie; there they cast out their mooring-stones and made fast the
    hawsers. They then got out upon the sea-shore and landed the hecatomb for
    Apollo; Chryseis also left the ship, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="440" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="440" unit="line"/>and Odysseus led her to the altar to deliver
    her into the hands of her father. "Chryses," said he, "King Agamemnon has sent
    me to bring you back your child, and to offer sacrifice to Apollo on behalf of
    the Danaans, that we may propitiate the god, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="445" unit="line"/>who has now brought sorrow upon the Argives."
    So saying he gave the girl over to her father, who received her gladly, and
    they ranged the holy hecatomb all orderly round the altar of the god. They
    washed their hands and took up the barley-meal to sprinkle over the victims, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="450" unit="line"/>while Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed
    aloud on their behalf. "Hear me," he cried, "O god of the silver bow, you who
    protect <placeName key="perseus,Chryse">Chryse</placeName> and holy Cilla, and
    rule <placeName key="perseus,Tenedos">Tenedos</placeName> with your might. Even
    as you did hear me aforetime when I prayed, and did press hard upon the
    Achaeans, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="455" unit="line"/>so hear me yet again, and stay this fearful
    pestilence from the Danaans." Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer.
    When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley-meal, they drew back the
    heads of the victims and killed and flayed them. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="460" unit="line"/>They cut out the thigh-bones, wrapped them
    round in two layers of fat, set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them, and
    then Chryses laid them on the wood fire and poured wine over them, while the
    young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands. When the
    thigh-bones were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="465" unit="line"/>they cut the rest up small, put the pieces upon
    the spits, roasted them till they were done, and drew them off: then, when they
    had finished their work [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] and the feast was
    ready, they ate it, and every man had his full share, so that all were
    satisfied. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="470" unit="line"/>pages filled the mixing-bowl with wine and
    water and handed it round, after giving every man his drink-offering. Thus all
    day long the young men worshipped the god with song, hymning him and chanting
    the joyous paean, and the god took pleasure in their voices; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="475" unit="line"/>but when the sun went down, and it came on
    dark, they laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the ship, and
    when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they again set sail for
    the host of the Achaeans. Apollo sent them a fair wind, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="480" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="480" unit="line"/>so they raised their mast and hoisted their
    white sails aloft. As the sail bellied with the wind the ship flew through the
    seething deep water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward.
    When they reached the wide-stretching host of the Achaeans, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="485" unit="line"/>they drew the vessel ashore, high and dry upon
    the sands, set her strong props beneath her, and went their ways to their own
    tents and ships. But Achilles stayed at his ships and nursed his anger [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>]. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="490" unit="line"/>He went not to the honorable assembly, and
    sallied not forth to fight, but gnawed at his own heart, pining for battle and
    the war-cry. Now after twelve days the immortal gods came back in a body to
    <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="495" unit="line"/>and Zeus led the way. Thetis was not unmindful
    of the charge her son had laid upon her, so she rose from under the sea and
    went, enveloped in mist, through great heaven with early morning to <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, where she found the mighty son of
    Kronos sitting all alone upon its topmost ridges. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="500" unit="line"/>She sat herself down before him, and with her
    left hand seized his knees, while with her right she caught him under the chin,
    and besought him, saying - "Father Zeus, if I ever did you service in word or
    deed among the immortals, hear my prayer, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="505" unit="line"/>and do honor to my son, whose life is to be cut
    short so early. King Agamemnon has dishonored him by taking his prize and
    keeping her. Honor him then yourself, Olympian lord of counsel, and grant
    victory to the Trojans, till the Achaeans </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="510" unit="line"/>give my son his due and load him with riches in
    requital [<term xml:lang="grc">timê</term>]." Zeus sat for a while silent, and
    without a word, but Thetis still kept firm hold of his knees, and besought him
    a second time. "Nod your head," said she, "and promise me surely, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="515" unit="line"/>or else deny me - for you have nothing to fear
    - that I may learn how greatly you disdain me." At this Zeus was much troubled
    and answered, "I shall have trouble if you set me quarreling with Hera, for she
    will provoke me with her taunting speeches; </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="520" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="520" unit="line"/>even now she is always railing at me before the
    other gods and accusing me of giving aid to the Trojans. Go back now, lest she
    should find out. I will consider the matter, and will bring it about as wish. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="525" unit="line"/>See, I nod my head that you believe me. This is
    the most solemn act that I can offer to any god. I never recall my word, or
    deceive, or fail to do what I say, when I have nodded my head." As he spoke the
    son of Kronos bowed his dark brows, and the ambrosial locks swayed </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="530" unit="line"/>on his immortal head, till vast <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> reeled. When the pair had thus laid
    their plans, they parted - Zeus to his mansion, while the goddess left the
    splendor of <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, and plunged into
    the depths of the sea. The gods rose from their seats, before the coming of
    their sire. Not one of them dared </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="535" unit="line"/>to remain sitting, but all stood up as he came
    among them. There, then, he took his seat. But Hera, when she saw him, knew
    that he and silver-footed Thetis, the daughter of the Old One of the Sea, had
    been planning mischief, so she at once began to upbraid him. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="540" unit="line"/>"Trickster," she cried, "which of the gods have
    you been taking into your counsels now? You are always settling matters in
    secret behind my back, and have never yet told me, if you could help it, one
    word of your intentions." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="545" unit="line"/>"Hera," replied the sire of gods and men, "you
    must not expect to be informed of all my counsels. You are my wife, but you
    would find it hard to understand them. When it is proper for you to hear, there
    is no one, god or man, who will be told sooner, but when I mean to keep a
    matter to myself, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="550" unit="line"/>you must not pry nor ask questions." "Dread son
    of Kronos," answered Hera, "what are you talking about? I? Pry and ask
    questions? Never. I let you have your own way in everything. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="555" unit="line"/>Still, I have a strong misgiving that Thetis,
    daughter of the Old One of the Sea, has been talking you over, for she was with
    you and had hold of your knees this self-same morning. I believe, therefore,
    that you have been promising her to give glory to Achilles, and to kill many
    people at the ships of the Achaeans." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="560" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="560" unit="line"/>"Wife," said Zeus, "I can do nothing but you
    suspect me and find it out. You will take nothing by it, for I shall only
    dislike you the more, and it will go harder with you. Granted that it is as you
    say; I mean to have it so; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="565" unit="line"/>sit down and hold your tongue as I bid you for
    if I once begin to lay my hands about you, though all heaven were on your side
    it would profit you nothing." On this Hera was frightened, so she curbed her
    stubborn will and sat down in silence. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="570" unit="line"/>But the heavenly beings were disquieted
    throughout the house of Zeus, till the cunning workman Hephaistos began to try
    and pacify his mother Hera. "It will be intolerable," said he, "if you two fall
    to wrangling </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="575" unit="line"/>and setting heaven in an uproar about a pack of
    mortals. If such ill counsels are to prevail, we shall have no pleasure at our
    banquet. Let me then advise my mother - and she must herself know that it will
    be better - to make friends with my dear father Zeus, lest he again scold her
    and disturb our feast. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="580" unit="line"/>If the Olympian Thunderer wants to hurl us all
    from our seats, he can do so, for he is far the strongest, so give him fair
    words, and he will then soon be in a good humor with us." As he spoke, he took
    a double cup of nectar, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="585" unit="line"/>and placed it in his mother's hand. "Cheer up,
    my dear mother," said he, "and make the best of it. I love you dearly, and
    should be very sorry to see you get a thrashing; however grieved I might be, I
    could not help for there is no standing against Zeus. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="590" unit="line"/>Once before when I was trying to help you, he
    caught me by the foot and flung me from the heavenly threshold. All day long
    from morn till eve, was I falling, till at sunset I came to ground in the
    island of <placeName key="tgn,7011173">Lemnos</placeName>, and there I lay,
    with very little life left in me, till the Sintians came and tended me." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="595" unit="line"/>Hera smiled at this, and as she smiled she took
    the cup from her son's hands. Then Hephaistos drew sweet nectar from the
    mixing-bowl, and served it round among the gods, going from left to right; and
    the blessed gods laughed out a loud approval </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:1"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="600" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="600" unit="line"/>as they saw him bustling about the heavenly
    mansion. Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they
    feasted, and every one had his full share, so that all were satisfied. Apollo
    struck his lyre, and the Muses lifted up their sweet voices, taking turns. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="605" unit="line"/>But when the sun's glorious light had faded,
    they went home to bed, each in his own abode, which lame Hephaistos with his
    consummate skill had fashioned for them. So Zeus, the Olympian Lord of Thunder,
    hied him to the bed </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="610" unit="line"/>in which he always slept; and when he had got
    on to it he went to sleep, with Hera of the golden throne by his side. </p>
    </div>

