+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:15"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>But when their flight had taken them past the
    trench and the set stakes, and many had fallen by the hands of the Danaans, the
    Trojans made a halt on reaching their chariots, routed and pale with fear. Zeus
    now woke on the crests of Ida, where he was lying with golden-throned Hera by
    his side, and starting to his feet he saw the Trojans and Achaeans, the one
    thrown into confusion, and the others driving them pell-mell before them with
    King Poseidon in their midst. He saw Hektor lying on the ground with his
    comrades gathered round him, gasping for breath, wandering in mind and vomiting
    blood, for it was not the feeblest of the Achaeans who struck him. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="12" unit="line"/>The sire of gods and men had pity on him, and
    looked fiercely on Hera. "I see, Hera," said he, "you mischief-making
    trickster, that your cunning has stayed Hektor from fighting and has caused the
    rout of his host. I am in half a mind to thrash you, in which case you will be
    the first to reap the fruits of your scurvy knavery. Do you not remember how
    once upon a time I had you hanged? I fastened two anvils on to your feet, and
    bound your hands in a chain of gold which none might break, and you hung in
    mid-air among the clouds. All the gods in Olympus were in a fury, but they
    could not reach you to set you free; when I caught any one of them I gripped
    him and hurled him from the heavenly threshold till he came fainting down to
    earth; yet even this did not relieve my mind from the incessant anxiety</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="25" unit="line"/>which I felt about noble Herakles whom you and
    Boreas had spitefully conveyed beyond the seas [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>] to Cos, after suborning the tempests; but I rescued him, and
    notwithstanding all his mighty labors I brought him back again to <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>. I would remind you of this that you
    may learn to leave off being so deceitful, and discover how much you are likely
    to gain by the embraces out of which you have come here to trick me." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="34" unit="line"/>Hera trembled as he spoke, and said, "May heaven
    above and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx - and
    this is the most solemn oath that a blessed god can take - nay, I swear also by
    your own almighty head and by our bridal bed - things over which I could never
    possibly perjure myself - that Poseidon is not punishing Hektor and the Trojans
    and helping the Achaeans through any doing of mine; it is all of his own mere
    motion because he was sorry to see the Achaeans hard pressed at their ships: if
    I were advising him, I should tell him to do as you bid him." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="47" unit="line"/>The sire of gods and men smiled and answered,
    "If you, Hera, were always to support me when we sit in council of the gods,
    Poseidon, like it or no, would soon come round to your and my way of thinking
    [noon]. If, then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among
    the rank and file of the gods, and tell Iris and Apollo lord of the bow, that I
    want them - Iris, that she may go to the Achaean host and tell Poseidon to
    leave off fighting and go home, and Apollo, that he may send Hektor again into
    battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus forget his present sufferings,
    and drive the Achaeans back in confusion till they fall among the ships of
    Achilles son of Peleus. Achilles will then send his comrade Patroklos into
    battle, and Hektor will kill him in front of <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName> after he has slain many warriors, and among them my own
    noble son Sarpedon. Achilles will kill Hektor to avenge Patroklos, and from
    that time I will bring it about that the Achaeans shall persistently drive the
    Trojans back till they fulfill the counsels of Athena and take <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>. But I will not stay my anger, nor
    permit any god to help the Danaans till I have accomplished the desire of the
    son of Peleus, according to the promise I made by bowing my head on the day
    when Thetis touched my knees and besought me to give him honor." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="78" unit="line"/>Hera heeded his words and went from the heights
    of Ida to great <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>. Swift as the
    thought [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] of one whose fancy carries him over
    vast continents, and he says to himself, "Now I will be here, or there," and he
    would have all manner of things - even so swiftly did Hera wing her way till
    she came to high <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> and went in
    among the gods who were gathered in the house of Zeus. When they saw her they
    all of them came up to her, and held out their cups to her by way of greeting.
    She let the others be, but took the cup offered her by lovely Themis, who was
    first to come running up to her. "Hera," said she, "why are you here? And you
    seem troubled - has your husband the son of Kronos been frightening you?" </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="93" unit="line"/>And Hera answered, "Themis, do not ask me about
    it. You know what a proud and cruel disposition my husband has. Lead the gods
    to table, where you and all the immortals can hear the wicked designs which he
    has avowed. Many a one, mortal and immortal, will be angered by them, however
    peaceably he may be feasting now." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="100" unit="line"/>On this Hera sat down, and the gods were
    troubled throughout the house of Zeus. Laughter sat on her lips but her brow
    was furrowed with care, and she spoke up in a rage. "Fools that we are," she
    cried, "to be thus madly angry with Zeus; we keep on wanting to go up to him
    and stay him by force or by persuasion, but he sits aloof and cares for nobody,
    for he knows that he is much stronger than any other of the immortals. Make the
    best, therefore, of whatever ills he may choose to send each one of you; Ares,
    I take it, has had a taste of them already, for his son Askalaphos has fallen
    in battle - the man whom of all others he loved most dearly and whose father he
    owns himself to be." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:15"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="113" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="113" unit="line"/>When he heard this Ares smote his two sturdy
    thighs with the flat of his hands, and said in anger, "Do not blame me, you
    gods that dwell in heaven, if I go to the ships of the Achaeans and avenge the
    death of my son, even though it end in my being struck by Zeus' lightning and
    lying in blood and dust among the corpses." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="119" unit="line"/>As he spoke he gave orders to yoke his horses
    Panic and Rout, while he put on his armor. On this, Zeus would have been roused
    to still more fierce and implacable anger [<term xml:lang="grc">mênis</term>]
    against the other immortals, had not Athena, alarmed for the safety of the
    gods, sprung from her seat and hurried outside. She tore the helmet from his
    head and the shield from his shoulders, and she took the bronze spear from his
    strong hand and set it on one side; then she said to Ares, "Mad one, you are
    undone; you have ears that hear not, or you have lost all sense of respect
    [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>] and understanding [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>]; have you not heard what Hera has said on coming straight from
    the presence of Olympian Zeus? Do you wish to go through all kinds of suffering
    before you are brought back sick and sorry to <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, after having caused infinite mischief to all us
    others? Zeus would instantly leave the Trojans and Achaeans to themselves; he
    would come to <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> to punish us,
    and would grip us up one after another, guilty [<term xml:lang="grc">aitios</term>] or not guilty. Therefore lay aside your anger for the death
    of your son; better men than he have either been killed already or will fall
    hereafter, and one cannot protect every one's whole family." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="142" unit="line"/>With these words she took Ares back to his
    seat. Meanwhile Hera called Apollo outside, with Iris the messenger of the
    gods. "Zeus," she said to them, "desires you to go to him at once on <placeName key="tgn,1105013">Mount Ida</placeName>; when you have seen him you are to
    do as he may then bid you." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="149" unit="line"/>Thereon Hera left them and resumed her seat
    inside, while Iris and Apollo made all haste on their way. When they reached
    many-fountained Ida, mother of wild beasts, they found Zeus seated on topmost
    Gargaros with a fragrant cloud encircling his head as with a diadem. They stood
    before his presence, and he was pleased with them for having been so quick in
    obeying the orders his wife had given them. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="157" unit="line"/>He spoke to Iris first. "Go," said he, "fleet
    Iris, tell King Poseidon what I now bid you - and tell him true. Bid him leave
    off fighting, and either join the company of the gods, or go down into the sea.
    If he takes no heed and disobeys me, let him consider well whether he is strong
    enough to hold his own against me if I attack him. I am older and much stronger
    than he is; yet he is not afraid to set himself up as on a level with myself,
    of whom all the other gods stand in awe." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="168" unit="line"/>Iris, fleet as the wind, obeyed him, and as the
    cold hail or snowflakes that fly from out the clouds before the blast of
    Boreas, even so did she wing her way till she came close up to the great shaker
    of the earth. Then she said, "I have come, O dark-haired king that holds the
    world in his embrace, to bring you a message from Zeus. He bids you leave off
    fighting, and either join the company of the gods or go down into the sea; if,
    however, you take no heed and disobey him, he says he will come down here and
    fight you. He would have you keep out of his reach, for he is older and much
    stronger than you are, and yet you are not afraid to set yourself up as on a
    level with himself, of whom all the other gods stand in awe." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="184" unit="line"/>Poseidon was very angry and said, "Great
    heavens! strong as Zeus may be, he has said more than he can do if he has
    threatened violence against me, who am of like honor with himself. We were
    three brothers whom Rhea bore to Kronos - Zeus, myself, and Hades who rules the
    world below. Heaven and earth were divided into three parts, and each of us was
    to have an equal share. When we cast lots, it fell to me to have my dwelling in
    the sea for evermore; Hades took the darkness of the realms under the earth,
    while air and sky and clouds were the portion that fell to Zeus; but earth and
    great <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> are the common property
    of all.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="193" unit="line"/>Therefore I will not walk as Zeus would have
    me. For all his strength, let him keep to his own third share and be contented
    without threatening to lay hands upon me as though I were nobody. Let him keep
    his bragging talk for his own sons and daughters, who must perforce obey him.
    </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:15"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="200" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="200" unit="line"/>Iris fleet as the wind then answered, "Am I
    really, Poseidon, to take this daring and unyielding message to Zeus, or will
    you reconsider your answer? Sensible people are open to argument, and you know
    that the Erinyes always range themselves on the side of the older person." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="205" unit="line"/>Poseidon answered, "Goddess Iris, your words
    have been spoken in season. It is well when a messenger shows so much
    discretion. Nevertheless it cuts me to the very heart with grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] that any one should rebuke so angrily another
    who is his own peer, and of like empire with himself. Now, however, I will give
    way in spite of my displeasure; furthermore let me tell you, and I mean what I
    say - if contrary to the desire of myself, Athena driver of the spoil, Hera,
    Hermes, and King Hephaistos, Zeus spares steep <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>, and will not let the Achaeans have the great triumph of
    sacking it, let him understand that he will incur our implacable resentment." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="218" unit="line"/>Poseidon now left the field to go down under
    the sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>], and sorely did the Achaeans miss
    him. Then Zeus said to Apollo, "Go, dear Phoebus, to Hektor, for Poseidon who
    holds the earth in his embrace has now gone down under the sea to avoid the
    severity of my displeasure. Had he not done so those gods who are below with
    Kronos would have come to hear of the fight between us. It is better for both
    of us that he should have curbed his anger and kept out of my reach, for I
    should have had much trouble with him. Take, then, your tasseled aegis, and
    shake it furiously, so as to set the Achaean heroes in a panic; take, moreover,
    brave Hektor, O Far-Darter, into your own care, and rouse him to deeds of
    daring, till the Achaeans are sent fleeing back to their ships and to the
    <placeName key="tgn,7002638">Hellespont</placeName>. From that point I will
    think it well over, how the Achaeans may have a respite from their troubles
    [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>]." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="236" unit="line"/>Apollo obeyed his father's saying, and left the
    crests of Ida, flying like a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds.
    He found Hektor no longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for he had
    just come to himself again. He knew those who were about him, and the sweat and
    hard breathing had left him from the moment when the will [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] of aegis-bearing Zeus had revived him. Apollo stood beside him
    and said, "Hektor, son of Priam, why are you so faint, and why are you here
    away from the others? Has any mishap befallen you?" </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="246" unit="line"/>Hektor in a weak voice answered, "And which,
    kind sir, of the gods are you, who now ask me thus? Do you not know that Ajax
    struck me on the chest with a stone as I was killing his comrades at the ships
    of the Achaeans, and compelled me to leave off fighting? I made sure that this
    very day I should breathe my last and go down into the house of Hades." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="253" unit="line"/>Then King Apollo said to him, "Take heart; the
    son of Kronos has sent you a mighty helper from Ida to stand by you and defend
    you, even me, Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, who have been guardian
    hitherto not only of yourself but of your city. Now, therefore, order your
    horsemen to drive their chariots to the ships in great multitudes. I will go
    before your horses to smooth the way for them, and will turn the Achaeans in
    flight." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="262" unit="line"/>As he spoke he infused great strength into the
    shepherd of his people. And as a horse, stabled and full-fed, breaks loose and
    gallops gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to take his
    bath in the river - he tosses his head, and his mane streams over his shoulders
    as in all the pride of his strength he flies full speed to the pastures where
    the mares are feeding - even so Hektor, when he heard what the god said, urged
    his horsemen on, and sped forward as fast as his limbs could take him.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="270" unit="line"/>As country peasants set their hounds on to a
    horned stag or wild goat - he has taken shelter under rock or thicket, and they
    cannot find him, but, lo, a bearded lion whom their shouts have roused stands
    in their path, and they are in no further humor for the chase - even so the
    Achaeans were still charging on in a body, using their swords and spears
    pointed at both ends, but when they saw Hektor going about among his men they
    were afraid, and their hearts fell down into their feet. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:15"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="281" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="281" unit="line"/>Then spoke Thoas son of Andraimon, leader of
    the Aetolians, a man who could throw a good throw, and who was staunch also in
    close fight, while few could surpass him in debate when opinions were divided.
    He then with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: "What, in heaven's
    name, do I now see? Is it not Hektor come to life again? Every one made sure he
    had been killed by Ajax son of Telamon, but it seems that one of the gods has
    again rescued him. He has killed many of us Danaans already, and I take it will
    yet do so, for the hand of Zeus must be with him or he would never dare show
    himself so masterful in the forefront of the battle. Now, therefore, let us all
    do as I say; let us order the main body of our forces to fall back upon the
    ships, but let those of us who profess to be the flower of the army stand firm,
    and see whether we cannot hold Hektor back at the point of our spears as soon
    as he comes near us; I conceive that he will then think better of it before he
    tries to charge into the press of the Danaans." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="300" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had
    said. Those who were about Ajax and King Idomeneus, the followers moreover of
    Teucer, Meriones, and Meges peer of Ares called all their best men about them
    and sustained the fight against Hektor and the Trojans, but the main body fell
    back upon the ships of the Achaeans. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="306" unit="line"/>The Trojans pressed forward in a dense body,
    with Hektor striding on at their head. Before him went Phoebus Apollo shrouded
    in cloud about his shoulders. He bore aloft the terrible aegis with its shaggy
    fringe, which Hephaistos the smith had given Zeus to strike terror into the
    hearts of men. With this in his hand he led on the Trojans. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="312" unit="line"/>The Argives held together and stood their
    ground. The cry of battle rose high from either side, and the arrows flew from
    the bowstrings. Many a spear sped from strong hands and fastened in the bodies
    of many a valiant warrior, while others fell to earth midway, before they could
    taste of man's fair flesh and glut themselves with blood. So long as Phoebus
    Apollo held his aegis quietly and without shaking it, the weapons on either
    side took effect and the people fell, but when he shook it straight in the face
    of the Danaans and raised his mighty battle-cry their hearts fainted within
    them and they forgot their former prowess. As when two wild beasts spring in
    the dead of night on a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep when the
    herdsman is not there - even so were the Danaans struck helpless, for Apollo
    filled them with panic and gave victory to Hektor and the Trojans. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="328" unit="line"/>The fight then became more scattered and they
    killed one another where they best could. Hektor killed Stichios and
    Arkesilaos, the one, leader of the Boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade
    of Menestheus. Aeneas killed Medon and <placeName key="perseus,Iasos">Iasos</placeName>. The first was bastard son to Oileus, and brother to
    Ajax, but he lived in Phylake away from his own country, for he had killed a
    man, a kinsman of his stepmother Eriopis whom Oileus had married. <placeName key="perseus,Iasos">Iasos</placeName> had become a leader of the Athenians,
    and was son of Sphelus the son of Boukolos. Polydamas killed Mekisteus, and
    Polites Echios, in the front of the battle, while Agenor slew Klonios.
    <placeName key="tgn,7008038">Paris</placeName> struck Deiochus from behind
    in the lower part of the shoulder, as he was fleeing among the foremost, and
    the point of the spear went clean through him. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="343" unit="line"/>While they were spoiling these heroes of their
    armor, the Achaeans were fleeing pellmell to the trench and the set stakes, and
    were forced back within their wall. Hektor then cried out to the Trojans,
    "Forward to the ships, and let the spoils be. If I see any man keeping back on
    the other side the wall away from the ships I will have him killed: his kinsmen
    and kinswomen shall not give him his dues of fire, but dogs shall tear him in
    pieces in front of our city." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="352" unit="line"/>As he spoke he laid his whip about his horses'
    shoulders and called to the Trojans throughout their ranks; the Trojans shouted
    with a cry that rent the air, and kept their horses neck and neck with his own.
    Phoebus Apollo went before, and kicked down the banks of the deep trench into
    its middle so as to make a great broad bridge, as broad as the throw of a spear
    when a man is trying his strength. The Trojan battalions poured over the
    bridge, and Apollo with his redoubtable aegis led the way. He kicked down the
    wall of the Achaeans as easily as a child who playing on the sea-shore has
    built a house of sand and then kicks it down again and destroys it - even so
    did you, O Apollo, shed toil and trouble upon the Argives, filling them with
    panic and confusion. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="367" unit="line"/>Thus then were the Achaeans hemmed in at their
    ships, calling out to one another and raising their hands with loud cries every
    man to heaven. Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans, lifted up
    his hands to the starry firmament of heaven, and prayed more fervently than any
    of them. "Father Zeus," said he, "if ever any one in wheat-growing <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName> burned you fat thigh-bones of sheep or
    heifer and prayed that he might return safely home, whereon you bowed your head
    to him in assent, bear it in mind now, and suffer not the Trojans to triumph
    thus over the Achaeans." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:15"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="377" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="377" unit="line"/>All counseling Zeus thundered loudly in answer
    to die prayer of the aged son of Neleus. When the heard Zeus thunder they flung
    themselves yet more fiercely on the Achaeans. As a wave breaking over the
    bulwarks of a ship when the sea runs high before a gale- for it is the force of
    the wind that makes the waves so great - even so did the Trojans spring over
    the wall with a shout, and drive their chariots onwards. The two sides fought
    with their double-pointed spears in hand-to-hand encounter-the Trojans from
    their chariots, and the Achaeans climbing up into their ships and wielding the
    long pikes that were lying on the decks ready for use in a sea-fight, jointed
    and shod with bronze. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="390" unit="line"/>Now Patroklos, so long as the Achaeans and
    Trojans were fighting about the wall, but were not yet within it and at the
    ships, remained sitting in the tent of good Eurypylos, entertaining him with
    his conversation and spreading herbs over his wound to ease his pain. When,
    however, he saw the Trojans swarming through the breach in the wall, while the
    Achaeans were clamoring and struck with panic, he cried aloud, and smote his
    two thighs with the flat of his hands. "Eurypylos," said he in his dismay, "I
    know you want me badly, but I cannot stay with you any longer, for there is
    hard fighting going on; a squire [<term xml:lang="grc">therapôn</term>] shall
    take care of you now, for I must make all speed to Achilles, and induce him to
    fight if I can; who knows but with the help of a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> I may persuade him. A man does well to listen to the advice
    of a friend." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="405" unit="line"/>When he had thus spoken he went his way. The
    Achaeans stood firm and resisted the attack of the Trojans, yet though these
    were fewer in number, they could not drive them back from the ships, neither
    could the Trojans break the Achaean ranks and make their way in among the tents
    and ships. As a carpenter's line gives a true edge to a piece of ship's timber,
    in the hand of some skilled workman whom Athena has instructed in all kinds of
    useful arts - even so level was the issue of the fight between the two sides,
    as they fought some round one and some round another. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="415" unit="line"/>Hektor made straight for Ajax, and the put up
    fierce struggle [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] over the same ship. Hektor
    could not force Ajax back and fire the ship, nor yet could Ajax drive Hektor
    from the spot to which a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> had brought him. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="419" unit="line"/>Then Ajax struck Kaletor son of Klytios in the
    chest with a spear as he was bringing fire towards the ship. He fell heavily to
    the ground and the torch dropped from his hand. When Hektor saw his cousin
    fallen in front of the ship he shouted to the Trojans and Lycians saying,
    "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians good in close fight, bate not a jot, but
    rescue the son of Klytios lest the Achaeans strip him of his armor now that he
    has fallen in the struggle [<term xml:lang="grc">agôn</term>]." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="430" unit="line"/>He then aimed a spear at Ajax, and missed him,
    but he hit Lykophron a follower [<term xml:lang="grc">therapôn</term>] of Ajax,
    who came from <placeName key="tgn,7010869">Cythera</placeName>, but was living
    with Ajax inasmuch as he had killed a man among the Cythereans. Hektor's spear
    struck him on the head below the ear, and he fell headlong from the ship's prow
    on to the ground with no life left in him. Ajax shook with rage and said to his
    brother, "Teucer, my good man, our trusty comrade the son of Mastor has fallen,
    he came to live with us from <placeName key="tgn,7010869">Cythera</placeName>
    and whom we honored as much as our own parents. Hektor has just killed him;
    fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow which Phoebus Apollo gave you." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="442" unit="line"/>Teucer heard him and hastened towards him with
    his bow and quiver in his hands. Forthwith he showered his arrows on the
    Trojans, and hit Kleitos the son of Pisenor, comrade of Polydamas the noble son
    of Panthoos, with the reins in his hands as he was attending to his horses; he
    was in the middle of the very thickest part of the fight, doing good service to
    Hektor and the Trojans, but evil had now come upon him, and not one of those
    who were fain to do so could avert it, for the arrow struck him on the back of
    the neck. He fell from his chariot and his horses shook the empty car as they
    swerved aside. King Polydamas saw what had happened, and was the first to come
    up to the horses; he gave them in charge to Astynoos son of Protiaon, and
    ordered him to look on, and to keep the horses near at hand. He then went back
    and took his place in the front ranks. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="458" unit="line"/>Teucer then aimed another arrow at Hektor, and
    there would have been no more fighting at the ships if he had hit him and
    killed him then and there: but Teucer did not escape the notice [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] of Zeus, who kept watch over Hektor and deprived
    him of his triumph, by breaking his bowstring for him just as he was drawing it
    and about to take his aim; on this the arrow went astray and the bow fell from
    his hands. Teucer shook with anger and said to his brother, "Alas, see how a
    <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> thwarts us in all we do; he has broken my
    bowstring and snatched the bow from my hand, though I strung it this selfsame
    morning that it might serve me for many an arrow." </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:15"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="472" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="472" unit="line"/>Ajax son of Telamon answered, "My good man, let
    your bow and your arrows be, for Zeus has made them useless in order to spite
    the Danaans. Take your spear, lay your shield upon your shoulder, and both
    fight the Trojans yourself and urge others to do so. They may be successful for
    the moment but if we fight as we ought they will find it a hard matter to take
    the ships." Teucer then took his bow and put it by in his tent. He hung a
    shield four hides thick about his shoulders, and on his comely head he set his
    helmet well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it;
    he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and forthwith he was by the side
    of Ajax. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="484" unit="line"/>When Hektor saw that Teucer's bow was of no
    more use to him, he shouted out to the Trojans and Lycians, "Trojans, Lycians,
    and Dardanians good in close fight, be men, my friends, and show your mettle
    here at the ships, for I see the weapon of one of their chieftains made useless
    by the hand of Zeus. It is easy to see when Zeus is helping people and means to
    help them still further, or again when he is bringing them down and will do
    nothing for them; he is now on our side, and is going against the Argives.
    Therefore swarm round the ships and fight. If any of you is struck by spear or
    sword and loses his life, let him die; he dies with honor who dies fighting for
    his country; and he will leave his wife and children safe behind him, with his
    house and allotment unplundered if only the Achaeans can be driven back to
    their own land, they and their ships." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="500" unit="line"/>With these words he put heart and soul into
    them all. Ajax on the other side exhorted his comrades saying, "Shame [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>] on you Argives, we are now utterly undone,
    unless we can save ourselves by driving the enemy from our ships. Do you think,
    if Hektor takes them, that you will be able to get home by land? Can you not
    hear him cheering on his whole host to fire our fleet, and bidding them
    remember that they are not at a dance [<term xml:lang="grc">khoros</term>] but
    in battle? Our only thought [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] and plan [<term xml:lang="grc">mêtis</term>] is to fight them with might and main; we had
    better chance it, life or death, once for all, than fight long and without
    issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than ourselves." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="514" unit="line"/>With these words he put life [<term xml:lang="grc">menos</term>] and spirit [<term xml:lang="grc">thumos</term>]
    into them all. Hektor then killed Schedios son of Perimedes, leader of the
    Phoceans, and Ajax killed Laodamas leader of foot soldiers and son to Antenor.
    Polydamas killed Otos of Cyllene a comrade of the son of Phyleus and chief of
    the proud Epeans. When Meges saw this he sprang upon him, but Polydamas
    crouched down, and he missed him, for Apollo would not suffer the son of
    Panthoos to fall in battle; but the spear hit Croesmus in the middle of his
    chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and Meges stripped him of his
    armor. At that moment the valiant warrior Dolops son of Lampos sprang upon
    Lampos was son of Laomedon and for his valor, while his son Dolops was versed
    in all the ways of war. He then struck the middle of the son of Phyleus' shield
    with his spear, setting on him at close quarters, but his good corselet made
    with plates of metal saved him; Phyleus had brought it from <placeName key="perseus,Ephyra">Ephyra</placeName> and the river Selleis, where his
    host, King Euphetes, had given it him to wear in battle and protect him. It now
    served to save the life of his son. Then Meges struck the topmost crest of
    Dolops' bronze helmet with his spear</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="536" unit="line"/>and tore away its plume of horse-hair, so that
    all newly dyed with scarlet as it was it tumbled down into the dust. While he
    was still fighting and confident of victory, Menelaos came up to help Meges,
    and got by the side of Dolops unperceived; he then speared him in the shoulder,
    from behind, and the point, driven so furiously, went through into his chest,
    whereon he fell headlong. The two then made towards him to strip him of his
    armor, but Hektor called on all his brothers for help, and he especially
    upbraided brave Melanippos son of Hiketaon, who erewhile used to pasture his
    herds of cattle in Perkote before the war broke out; but when the ships of the
    Danaans came, he went back to <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>,
    where he was eminent among the Trojans, and lived near Priam who treated him as
    one of his own sons. Hektor now rebuked him and said, "Why, Melanippos, are we
    thus remiss? do you take no note of the death of your kinsman, and do you not
    see how they are trying to take Dolops' armor? Follow me; there must be no
    fighting the Argives from a distance now, but we must do so in close combat
    till either we kill them or they take the high wall of <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName> and slay her people." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="559" unit="line"/>He led on as he spoke, and the hero Melanippos
    followed after. Meanwhile Ajax son of Telamon was cheering on the Argives. "My
    friends," he cried, "be men, and fear the loss of respect [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>]; quit yourselves in battle so as to win respect from one
    another. Men who respect each other's good opinion are less likely to be killed
    than those who do not, but in flight there is neither gain nor glory [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>]." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="565" unit="line"/>Thus did he exhort men who were already bent
    upon driving back the Trojans. They laid his words to heart and hedged the
    ships as with a wall of bronze, while Zeus urged on the Trojans. Menelaos of
    the loud battle-cry urged Antilokhos on. "Antilokhos," said he, "you are young
    and there is none of the Achaeans more fleet of foot or more valiant than you
    are. See if you cannot spring upon some Trojan and kill him." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="572" unit="line"/>He hurried away when he had thus spurred
    Antilokhos, who at once darted out from the front ranks and aimed a spear,
    after looking carefully round him. The Trojans fell back as he threw, and the
    dart did not speed from his hand without effect, for it struck Melanippos the
    proud son of Hiketaon in the breast by the nipple as he was coming forward, and
    his armor rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Antilokhos
    sprang upon him as a dog springs on a fawn which a hunter has hit as it was
    breaking away from its covert, and killed it. Even so, O Melanippos, did
    stalwart Antilokhos spring upon you to strip you of your armor; but noble
    Hektor marked him, and came running up to him through the thick of the battle.
    Antilokhos, brave warrior though he was, would not stay to face him, but fled
    like some savage creature which knows it has done wrong, and flies, when it has
    killed a dog or a man who is herding his cattle, before a body of men can be
    gathered to attack it. Even so did the son of Nestor flee, and the Trojans and
    Hektor with a cry that rent the air showered their weapons after him; nor did
    he turn round and stay his flight till he had reached his comrades. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:15"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="592" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="592" unit="line"/>The Trojans, fierce as lions, were still
    rushing on towards the ships in fulfillment of the behests of Zeus who kept
    spurring them on to new deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the
    Argives and defeated them by encouraging the Trojans. For he meant giving glory
    to Hektor son of Priam, and letting him throw fire upon the ships, till he had
    fulfilled the unrighteous prayer that Thetis had made him; Zeus, therefore,
    bided his time till he should see the glare of a blazing ship. From that hour
    he was about so to order that the Trojans should be driven back from the ships
    and to grant glory to the Achaeans. With this purpose he inspired Hektor son of
    Priam, who was eager enough already, to assail the ships. His fury was as that
    of Ares, or as when a fire is raging in the glades of some dense forest upon
    the mountains; he foamed at the mouth, his eyes glared under his terrible
    eye-brows, and his helmet quivered on his temples by reason of the fury with
    which he fought.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="610" unit="line"/>Zeus from heaven was with him, and though he
    was but one against many, granted him victory and glory; for he was doomed to
    an early death, and already Pallas Athena was hurrying on the hour of his
    destruction at the hands of the son of Peleus. Now, however, he kept trying to
    break the ranks of the enemy wherever he could see them thickest, and in the
    goodliest armor; but do what he might he could not break through them, for they
    stood as a tower foursquare, or as some high cliff rising from the gray sea
    that braves the anger of the gale, and of the waves that thunder up against it.
    He fell upon them like flames of fire from every quarter. As when a wave,
    raised mountain high by wind and storm, breaks over a ship and covers it deep
    in foam, the fierce winds roar against the mast, the hearts of the sailors fail
    them for fear, and they are saved but by a very little from destruction - even
    so were the hearts of the Achaeans fainting within them. Or as a savage lion
    attacking a herd of cows while they are feeding by thousands in the low-lying
    meadows by some wide-watered shore - the herdsman is at his wit's end how to
    protect his herd and keeps going about now in the van and now in the rear of
    his cattle, while the lion springs into the thick of them and fastens on a cow
    so that they all tremble for fear - even so were the Achaeans utterly
    panic-stricken by Hektor and father Zeus. Nevertheless Hektor only killed
    Periphetes of <placeName key="perseus,Mycenae">Mycenae</placeName>; he was son
    of Kopreus who was wont to take the orders of King Eurystheus to mighty
    Herakles, but the son was far better in excellence [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>] than the father in every way; he was fleet of foot, a valiant
    warrior, and in understanding [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] ranked among
    the foremost men of <placeName key="perseus,Mycenae">Mycenae</placeName>. He it
    was who then afforded Hektor a triumph, for as he was turning back he stumbled
    against the rim of his shield which reached his feet, and served to keep the
    javelins off him. He tripped against this and fell face upward, his helmet
    ringing loudly about his head as he did so. Hektor saw him fall and ran up to
    him; he then thrust a spear into his chest, and killed him close to his own
    comrades. These, for all their sorrow, could not help him for they were
    themselves terribly afraid of Hektor. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="653" unit="line"/>They had now reached the ships and the prows of
    those that had been drawn up first were on every side of them, but the Trojans
    came pouring after them. The Argives were driven back from the first row of
    ships, but they made a stand by their tents without being broken up and
    scattered; shame [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>] and fear restrained them.
    They kept shouting incessantly to one another, and Nestor of Gerene, tower of
    strength to the Achaeans, was loudest in imploring every man by his parents,
    and beseeching him to stand firm. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="661" unit="line"/>"Be men, my friends," he cried, "and give
    respect [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>] to one another's good opinion.
    Think, all of you, on your children, your wives, your property, and your
    parents whether these be alive or dead. On their behalf though they are not
    here, I implore you to stand firm, and not to turn in flight." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="667" unit="line"/>With these words he put heart and soul into
    them all. Athena lifted the thick veil of darkness from their eyes, and much
    light fell upon them, alike on the side of the ships and on that where the
    fight was raging. They could see Hektor and all his men, both those in the rear
    who were taking no part in the battle, and those who were fighting by the
    ships. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="674" unit="line"/>Ajax could not bring himself to retreat along
    with the rest, but strode from deck to deck with a great sea-pike in his hands
    twelve cubits long and jointed with rings. As a man skilled in feats of
    horsemanship couples four horses together and comes tearing full speed along
    the public way from the country into some large town - many both men and women
    marvel as they see him for he keeps all the time changing his horse, springing
    from one to another without ever missing his feet while the horses are at a
    gallop - even so did Ajax go striding from one ship's deck to another, and his
    voice went up into the heavens. He kept on shouting his orders to the Danaans
    and exhorting them to defend their ships and tents;</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="688" unit="line"/>neither did Hektor remain within the main body
    of the Trojan warriors, but as a dun eagle swoops down upon a flock of
    wild-fowl feeding near a river-geese, it may be, or cranes, or long-necked
    swans - even so did Hektor make straight for a dark-prowed ship, rushing right
    towards it; for Zeus with his mighty hand impelled him forward, and roused his
    people to follow him. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="696" unit="line"/>And now the battle again raged furiously at the
    ships. You would have thought the men were coming on fresh and unwearied, so
    fiercely did they fight; and this was the mind [noos] in which they were - the
    Achaeans did not believe they should escape destruction but thought themselves
    doomed, while there was not a Trojan but his heart beat high with the hope of
    firing the ships and putting the Achaean heroes to the sword. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:15"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="703" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="703" unit="line"/>Thus were the two sides minded. Then Hektor
    seized the stern of the good ship that had brought Protesilaos to <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, but never bore him back to his native
    land. Round this ship there raged a close hand-to-hand fight between Danaans
    and Trojans. They did not fight at a distance with bows and javelins, but with
    one mind hacked at one another in close combat with their mighty swords and
    spears pointed at both ends; they fought moreover with keen battle-axes and
    with hatchets. Many a good stout blade hilted and scabbarded with iron, fell
    from hand or shoulder as they fought, and the earth ran red with blood. Hektor,
    when he had seized the ship, would not loose his hold but held on to its curved
    stern and shouted to the Trojans, "Bring fire, and raise the battle-cry all of
    you with a single voice. Now has Zeus granted us a day that will pay us for all
    the rest; this day we shall take the ships which came hither against heaven's
    will, and which have caused us such infinite suffering through the cowardice of
    our councilors, who when I would have done battle at the ships held me back and
    forbade the host to follow me; if Zeus did then indeed warp our judgments,
    himself now commands me and cheers me on." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="726" unit="line"/>As he spoke thus the Trojans sprang yet more
    fiercely on the Achaeans, and Ajax no longer held his ground, for he was
    overcome by the darts that were flung at him, and made sure that he was doomed.
    Therefore he left the raised deck at the stern, and stepped back on to the
    seven-foot bench of the oarsmen. Here he stood on the look-out, and with his
    spear held back Trojan whom he saw bringing fire to the ships. All the time he
    kept on shouting at the top of his voice and exhorting the Danaans. "My
    friends," he cried, "Danaan heroes, squires [<term xml:lang="grc">therapontes</term>] of Ares, be men my friends, and fight with might and
    with main. Can we hope to find helpers hereafter, or a wall to shield us more
    surely than the one we have? There is no strong city within reach, whence we
    may draw fresh population [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] to turn the
    scales in our favor. We are on the plain of the armed Trojans with the sea
    [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>] behind us, and far from our own
    country. Our salvation, therefore, is in the might of our hands and in hard
    fighting." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="742" unit="line"/>As he spoke he wielded his spear with still
    greater fury, and when any Trojan made towards the ships with fire to win favor
    [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>] with Hektor, he would be on the
    look-out for him, and drive at him with his long spear. Twelve men did he thus
    kill in hand-to-hand fight before the ships. <milestone n="746" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

