+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Now the other gods and the armed warriors on the
    plain slept soundly, but Zeus was wakeful, for he was thinking how to do honor
    to Achilles, and destroy many people at the ships of the Achaeans. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="5" unit="line"/>In the end he deemed it would be best to send a
    lying dream to King Agamemnon; so he called one to him and said to it, "Lying
    Dream, go to the ships of the Achaeans, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="10" unit="line"/>into the tent of Agamemnon, and say to him word
    to word as I now bid you. Tell him to get the Achaeans instantly under arms,
    for he shall take <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>. There are no
    longer divided counsels among the gods; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="15" unit="line"/>Hera has brought them to her own mind, and woe
    betides the Trojans." The dream went when it had heard its message, and soon
    reached the ships of the Achaeans. It sought Agamemnon son of Atreus and found
    him in his tent, wrapped in a profound slumber. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="20" unit="line"/>It hovered over his head in the likeness of
    Nestor, son of Neleus, whom Agamemnon honored above all his councilors, and
    said: - "You are sleeping, son of Atreus; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="25" unit="line"/>one who has the welfare of his host and so much
    other care upon his shoulders should dock his sleep. Hear me at once, for I
    come as a messenger from Zeus, who, though he be not near, yet takes thought
    for you and pities you. He bids you get the Achaeans instantly under arms, for
    you shall take </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="30" unit="line"/>
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>. There are no longer divided
    counsels among the gods; Hera has brought them over to her own mind, and woe
    betides the Trojans at the hands of Zeus. Remember this, and when you wake see
    that it does not escape you." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="35" unit="line"/>The dream then left him, and he thought of
    things that were, surely not to be accomplished. He thought that on that same
    day he was to take the city of Priam, but he little knew what was in the mind
    of Zeus, who had many another </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="40" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="40" unit="line"/>hard-fought fight in store alike for Danaans and
    Trojans. Then presently he woke, with the divine message still ringing in his
    ears; so he sat upright, and put on his soft shirt so fair and new, and over
    this his heavy cloak. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="45" unit="line"/>and slung his silver-studded sword about his
    shoulders; then he took the imperishable staff of his father, and sallied forth
    to the ships of the Achaeans. The goddess Dawn now wended her way to vast
    <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> that she might herald day
    to Zeus and to the other immortals, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="50" unit="line"/>and Agamemnon sent the criers round to call the
    people in assembly; so they called them and the people gathered thereon. But
    first he summoned a meeting of the elders at the ship of Nestor king of
    <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="55" unit="line"/>and when they were assembled he laid a cunning
    counsel before them. "My friends," said he, "I have had a dream from heaven in
    the dead of night, and its face and figure resembled none but Nestor's. It
    hovered over my head and said, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="60" unit="line"/>‘You are sleeping, son of Atreus; one who has
    the welfare of his host and so much other care upon his shoulders should dock
    his sleep. Hear me at once, for I am a messenger from Zeus, who, though he be
    not near, yet takes thought for you and pities you. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="65" unit="line"/>He bids you get the Achaeans instantly under
    arms, for you shall take <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>. There
    are no longer divided counsels among the gods; Hera has brought them over to
    her own mind, and woe betides the Trojans </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="70" unit="line"/>at the hands of Zeus. Remember this.’ The dream
    then vanished and I awoke. Let us now, therefore, arm the sons of the Achaeans.
    But it will be the right thing [<term xml:lang="grc">themis</term>] that I
    should first sound them, and to this end I will tell them to flee with their
    ships; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="75" unit="line"/>but do you others go about among the host and
    prevent their doing so." He then sat down, and Nestor the king of <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> with all sincerity and goodwill
    addressed them thus: "My friends," said he, "princes and councilors of the
    Argives, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="80" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="80" unit="line"/>if any other man of the Achaeans had told us of
    this dream we should have declared it false, and would have had nothing to do
    with it. But he who has seen it is the foremost man among us; we must therefore
    set about getting the people under arms." With this he led the way from the
    assembly, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="85" unit="line"/>and the other sceptered kings rose with him in
    obedience to the word of Agamemnon; but the people pressed forward to hear.
    They swarmed like bees that sally from some hollow cave and flit in countless
    throng among the spring flowers, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="90" unit="line"/>bunched in knots and clusters; even so did the
    mighty multitude pour from ships and tents to the assembly, and range
    themselves upon the wide-watered shore, while among them ran Wildfire Rumor,
    messenger of Zeus, urging them ever to the fore. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="95" unit="line"/>Thus they gathered in a pell-mell of mad
    confusion, and the earth groaned under the tramp of men as the people sought
    their places. Nine heralds went crying about among them to stay their tumult
    and bid them listen to the kings, till at last they were got into their several
    places and ceased their clamor. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="100" unit="line"/>Then King Agamemnon rose, holding his scepter.
    This was the work of Hephaistos, who gave it to Zeus the son of Kronos. Zeus
    gave it to Hermes, slayer of <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>,
    guide and guardian. King Hermes gave it to Pelops, the mighty charioteer, and </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="105" unit="line"/>Pelops to Atreus, shepherd of his people.
    Atreus, when he died, left it to Thyestes, rich in flocks, and Thyestes in his
    turn left it to be borne by Agamemnon, that he might be lord of all <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName> and of the isles. Leaning, then, on
    his scepter, he addressed the Argives. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="110" unit="line"/>"My friends," he said, "heroes, squires [<term xml:lang="grc">therapontes</term>] of Ares, Zeus the son of Kronos has tied
    me down with <term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>. Cruel, he gave me his solemn
    promise that I should sack the city of Priam before returning, but he has
    played me false, and is now bidding me </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="115" unit="line"/>go ingloriously back to <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName> with the loss of many people. Such is
    the will of Zeus, who has laid many a proud city in the dust, as he will yet
    lay others, for his power is above all. It will be a sorry tale hereafter that
    an </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="120" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="120" unit="line"/>Achaean host, at once so great and valiant,
    battled in vain against men fewer in number than themselves; but as yet the end
    is not in sight. Think that the Achaeans and Trojans have sworn to a solemn
    covenant, and that they have each been numbered - </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="125" unit="line"/>the Trojans by the roll of their householders,
    and we by companies of ten; think further that each of our companies desired to
    have a Trojan householder to pour out their wine; we are so greatly more in
    number that full many a company would have to go without its cup-bearer. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="130" unit="line"/>But they have in the town allies from other
    places, and it is these that hinder me from being able to sack the rich city of
    <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName>. Nine of Zeus years are gone; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="135" unit="line"/>the timbers of our ships have rotted; their
    tackling is sound no longer. Our wives and little ones at home look anxiously
    for our coming, but the work that we came hither to do has not been done. Now,
    therefore, let us all do as I say: </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="140" unit="line"/>let us sail back to our own land, for we shall
    not take <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>." With these words he
    moved the hearts of the multitude, so many of them as knew not the cunning
    counsel of Agamemnon. They surged to and fro like the waves </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="145" unit="line"/>of the Ikarian Sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>], when the east and south winds break from heaven's clouds to
    lash them; or as when the west wind sweeps over a field of grain and the ears
    bow beneath the blast, even so were they swayed as they flew with loud cries </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="150" unit="line"/>towards the ships, and the dust from under
    their feet rose heavenward. They cheered each other on to draw the ships into
    the sea; they cleared the channels in front of them; they began taking away the
    stays from underneath them, and the welkin rang with their glad cries, so eager
    were they to return. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="155" unit="line"/>Then surely the Argives would have had a return
    [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] after a fashion that was not fated. But
    Hera said to Athena, "Alas, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, unweariable, shall
    the Argives flee home to their own land over the broad sea, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="160" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="160" unit="line"/>and leave Priam and the Trojans the glory of
    still keeping Helen, for whose sake so many of the Achaeans have died at
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, far from their homes? Go
    about at once among the host, and speak fairly to them, man by man, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="165" unit="line"/>that they draw not their ships into the sea."
    Athena was not slack to do her bidding. Down she darted from the topmost
    summits of <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, and in a moment
    she was at the ships of the Achaeans. There she found Odysseus, peer of Zeus in
    counsel, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="170" unit="line"/>standing alone. He had not as yet laid a hand
    upon his ship, for he felt grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] and was
    sorry; so she went close up to him and said, "Odysseus, noble son of <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="175" unit="line"/>are you going to fling yourselves into your
    ships and be off home to your own land in this way? Will you leave Priam and
    the Trojans the glory of still keeping Helen, for whose sake so many of the
    Achaeans have died at <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, far from
    their homes? Go about at once among the host, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="180" unit="line"/>and speak fairly to them, man by man, that they
    draw not their ships into the sea." Odysseus knew the voice as that of the
    goddess: he flung his cloak from him and set off to run. His squire Eurybates,
    a man of Ithaca, who waited on him, took charge of the cloak, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="185" unit="line"/>whereon Odysseus went straight up to Agamemnon
    and received from him his ancestral, imperishable staff. With this he went
    about among the ships of the Achaeans. Whenever he met a king or chieftain, he
    stood by him and spoke him fairly. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="190" unit="line"/>"Sir," said he, "this flight is cowardly and
    unworthy. Stand to your post, and bid your people also keep their places. You
    do not yet know the full mind [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] of Agamemnon;
    he was sounding us, and ere long will visit the Achaeans with his displeasure.
    We were not all of us at the council to hear what he then said; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="195" unit="line"/>see to it lest he be angry and do us a
    mischief; for the <term xml:lang="grc">timê</term> of kings is great, and the
    hand of Zeus is with them." But when he came across some man from some locale
    [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] who was making a noise, he struck him
    with his staff and rebuked him, saying, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="200" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="200" unit="line"/>"What kind of <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> has possessed you? Hold your peace, and listen to better men
    than yourself. You are a coward and no warrior; you are nobody either in fight
    or council; we cannot all be kings; it is not well that there should be many
    masters; one man must be supreme - </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="205" unit="line"/>one king to whom the son of scheming Kronos has
    given the scepter and divine laws to rule over you all." Thus masterfully did
    he go about among the host, and the people hurried back to the council from
    their tents and ships with a sound as the thunder of surf when it comes
    crashing down upon the shore, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="210" unit="line"/>and all the sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>] is in an uproar. The rest now took their seats and kept to
    their own several places, but Thersites still went on wagging his unbridled
    tongue - a man of many words, and those unseemly; a monger of sedition, a
    railer against all who were in authority [<term xml:lang="grc">kosmos</term>],
    who cared not what he said, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="215" unit="line"/>so that he might set the Achaeans in a laugh.
    He was the ugliest man of all those that came before <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> - bandy-legged, lame of one foot, with
    his two shoulders rounded and hunched over his chest. His head ran up to a
    point, but there was little hair on the top of it. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="220" unit="line"/>Achilles and Odysseus hated him worst of all,
    for it was with them that he was most wont to wrangle; now, however, with a
    shrill squeaky voice he began heaping his abuse on Agamemnon. The Achaeans were
    angry and disgusted, yet none the less he kept on brawling and bawling at the
    son of Atreus. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="225" unit="line"/>"Agamemnon," he cried, "what ails you now, and
    what more do you want? Your tents are filled with bronze and with fair women,
    for whenever we take a town we give you the pick of them. Would you have yet
    more gold, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="230" unit="line"/>which some Trojan is to give you as a ransom
    for his son, when I or another Achaean has taken him prisoner? or is it some
    young girl to hide and lie with? It is not well that you, the ruler of the
    Achaeans, should bring them into such misery. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="235" unit="line"/>Weakling cowards, women rather than men, let us
    sail home, and leave this man here at <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> to stew in his own prizes of honor, and discover whether
    we were of any service to him or no. Achilles is a much better man than he is,
    and see how he has treated him - </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="240" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="240" unit="line"/>robbing him of his prize and keeping it
    himself. Achilles takes it meekly and shows no fight; if he did, son of Atreus,
    you would never again insult him." Thus railed Thersites, but Odysseus at once
    went up to him </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="245" unit="line"/>and rebuked him sternly. "Check your glib
    tongue, Thersites," said be, "and babble not a word further. Chide not with
    princes when you have none to back you. There is no viler creature come before
    <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> with the sons of Atreus. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="250" unit="line"/>Drop this chatter about kings, and neither
    revile them nor keep harping about homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]. We do not yet know how things are going to be, nor whether
    the Achaeans are to return with good success or evil. How dare you gibe at
    Agamemnon </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="255" unit="line"/>because the Danaans have awarded him so many
    prizes? I tell you, therefore - and it shall surely be - that if I again catch
    you talking such nonsense, I will either forfeit my own head </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="260" unit="line"/>and be no more called father of Telemakhos, or
    I will take you, strip away from you all respect [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>], and whip you out of the assembly till you go blubbering back
    to the ships." </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="265" unit="line"/>On this he beat him with his staff about the
    back and shoulders till he dropped and fell a-weeping. The golden scepter
    raised a bloody weal on his back, so he sat down frightened and in pain,
    looking foolish as he wiped the tears from his eyes. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="270" unit="line"/>The people were sorry for him, yet they laughed
    heartily, and one would turn to his neighbor saying, "Odysseus has done many a
    good thing ere now in fight and council, but he never did the Argives a better
    turn </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="275" unit="line"/>than when he stopped this man's mouth from
    prating further. He will give the kings no more of his insolence." Thus said
    the people. Then Odysseus rose, scepter in hand, and Athena </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="280" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="280" unit="line"/>in the likeness of a herald bade the people be
    still, that those who were far off might hear him and consider his council. He
    therefore with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: - "King
    Agamemnon, the Achaeans are for </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="285" unit="line"/>making you a by-word among all humankind. They
    forget the promise they made you when they set out from <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>, that you should not return till you
    had sacked the town of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and,
    like children or widowed women, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="290" unit="line"/>they murmur and would set off homeward. True it
    is that they have had toil [ponos] enough to be disheartened. A man chafes at
    having to stay away from his wife even for a single month, when he is on
    shipboard, at the mercy of wind and sea, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="295" unit="line"/>but it is now nine long years that we have been
    kept here; I cannot, therefore, blame the Achaeans if they turn restive; still
    we shall be shamed if we go home empty after so long a stay - therefore, my
    friends, be patient yet a little longer that we may learn </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="300" unit="line"/>whether the prophesyings of Kalkhas were false
    or true. "All who have not since perished must remember as though it were
    yesterday or the day before, how the ships of the Achaeans were detained in
    <placeName key="perseus,Aulis">Aulis</placeName> when we were on our way
    hither to make war on Priam and the Trojans. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="305" unit="line"/>We were ranged round about a fountain offering
    hecatombs to the gods upon their holy altars, and there was a fine plane-tree
    from beneath which there welled a stream of pure water. Then we saw a sign
    [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>]; for Zeus sent a fearful serpent out of
    the ground, with blood-red stains upon its back, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="310" unit="line"/>and it darted from under the altar on to the
    plane-tree. Now there was a brood of young sparrows, quite small, upon the
    topmost bough, peeping out from under the leaves, eight in all, and their
    mother that hatched them made nine. The serpent ate the poor cheeping things, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="315" unit="line"/>while the old bird flew about lamenting her
    little ones; but the serpent threw his coils about her and caught her by the
    wing as she was screaming. Then, when he had eaten both the sparrow and her
    young, the god who had sent him made him become a sign; for the son of scheming
    Kronos turned him into stone, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="320" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="320" unit="line"/>and we stood there wondering at that which had
    come to pass. Seeing, then, that such a fearful portent had broken in upon our
    hecatombs, Kalkhas forthwith declared to us the oracles of heaven. ‘Why,
    Achaeans,’ said he, ‘are you thus speechless? Zeus has sent us this sign, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="325" unit="line"/>long in coming, and long ere it be fulfilled,
    though its fame [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] shall last for ever. As the
    serpent ate the eight fledglings and the sparrow that hatched them, which makes
    nine, so shall we fight nine years at <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, but in the tenth shall take the town.’ </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="330" unit="line"/>This was what he said, and now it is all coming
    true. Stay here, therefore, all of you, till we take the city of Priam." On
    this the Argives raised a shout, till the ships rang again with the uproar. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="335" unit="line"/>Nestor, horseman of Gerene, then addressed
    them. "Shame on you," he cried, "to stay talking here like children, when you
    should fight like men. Where are our covenants now, and where the oaths that we
    have taken? </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="340" unit="line"/>Shall our counsels be flung into the fire, with
    our drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship wherein we have put our
    trust? We waste our time in words, and for all our talking here shall be no
    further forward. Stand, therefore, son of Atreus, by your own steadfast
    purpose; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="345" unit="line"/>lead the Argives on to battle, and leave this
    handful of men to rot, who scheme, and scheme in vain, to get back to
    <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName> ere they have learned
    whether Zeus be true or a liar. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="350" unit="line"/>For the mighty son of Kronos surely promised
    that we should succeed, when we Argives set sail to bring death and destruction
    upon the Trojans. He showed us favorable signs [<term xml:lang="grc">sêmata</term>] by flashing his lightning on our right hands; therefore let
    none make haste to go </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="355" unit="line"/>till he has first lain with the wife of some
    Trojan, and avenged the toil and sorrow that he has suffered for the sake of
    Helen. Nevertheless, if any man is in such haste to be at home again, let him
    lay his hand to his ship that he may meet his doom in the sight of all. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="360" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="360" unit="line"/>But, O king, consider and give ear to my
    counsel, for the word that I say may not be neglected lightly. Divide [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] your men, Agamemnon, into their several tribes
    and clans, that clans and tribes may stand by and help one another. If you do
    this, and if the Achaeans obey you, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="365" unit="line"/>you will find out who, both chiefs and peoples,
    are brave, and who are cowards; for they will vie against the other. Thus you
    shall also learn whether it is through the counsel of heaven or the cowardice
    of man that you shall fail to take the town." And Agamemnon answered, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="370" unit="line"/>"Nestor, you have again outdone the sons of the
    Achaeans in counsel. Would, by Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo, that I had
    among them ten more such councilors, for the city of King Priam would then soon
    fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="375" unit="line"/>But the son of Kronos afflicts me with bootless
    wranglings and strife. Achilles and I are quarreling about this girl, in which
    matter I was the first to offend; if we can be of one mind again, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="380" unit="line"/>the Trojans will not stave off destruction for
    a day. Now, therefore, get your morning meal, that our hosts join in fight.
    Whet well your spears; see well to the ordering of your shields; give good
    feeds to your horses, and look your chariots carefully over, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="385" unit="line"/>that we may do battle the livelong day; for we
    shall have no rest, not for a moment, till night falls to part us. The bands
    that bear your shields shall be wet with the sweat upon your shoulders, your
    hands shall weary upon your spears, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="390" unit="line"/>your horses shall steam in front of your
    chariots, and if I see any man shirking the fight, or trying to keep out of it
    at the ships, there shall be no help for him, but he shall be a prey to dogs
    and vultures." Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans roared approval. As when the
    waves run high </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="395" unit="line"/>before the blast of the south wind and break on
    some lofty headland, dashing against it and buffeting it without ceasing, as
    the storms from every quarter drive them, even so did the Achaeans rise and
    hurry in all directions to their ships. There they lighted their fires at their
    tents and got dinner, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="400" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="400" unit="line"/>offering sacrifice every man to one or other of
    the gods, and praying each one of them that he might live to come out of the
    fight. Agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed a fat five-year-old bull to the
    mighty son of Kronos, and invited the princes and elders of his host. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="405" unit="line"/>First he asked Nestor and King Idomeneus, then
    the two Ajaxes and the son of Tydeus, and sixthly Odysseus, peer of gods in
    counsel; but Menelaos came of his own accord, for he knew how busy his brother
    then was. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="410" unit="line"/>They stood round the bull with the barley-meal
    in their hands, and Agamemnon prayed, saying, "Zeus, most glorious, supreme,
    you who dwell in heaven, and ride upon the storm-cloud, grant that the sun may
    not go down, nor the night fall, till the palace of Priam is laid low, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="415" unit="line"/>and its gates are consumed with fire. Grant
    that my sword may pierce the shirt of Hektor about his heart, and that full
    many of his comrades may bite the dust as they fall dying round him." Thus he
    prayed, but the son of Kronos would not fulfill his prayer. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="420" unit="line"/>He accepted the sacrifice, yet none the less
    increased their toil [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] continually. When they
    had done praying and sprinkling the barley-meal upon the victim, they drew back
    its head, killed it, and then flayed it. They cut out the thigh-bones, wrapped
    them round in two layers of fat, and set pieces of raw meat on the top of them. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="425" unit="line"/>These they burned upon the split logs of
    firewood, but they spitted the inward meats, and held them in the flames to
    cook. When the thigh-bones were burned, and they had tasted the inward meats,
    they cut the rest up small, put the pieces upon spits, roasted them till they
    were done, and drew them off; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="430" unit="line"/>then, when they had finished their work [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] and the feast was ready, they ate it, and every
    man had his full share, so that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had
    enough to eat and drink, Nestor, horseman of Gerene, began to speak. "King
    Agamemnon," said he, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="435" unit="line"/>"let us not stay talking here, nor be slack in
    the work that heaven has put into our hands. Let the heralds summon the people
    to gather at their several ships; we will then go about among the host, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="440" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="440" unit="line"/>that we may begin fighting at once." Thus did
    he speak, and Agamemnon heeded his words. He at once sent the criers round to
    call the people in assembly. So they called them, and the people gathered
    thereon. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="445" unit="line"/>The chiefs about the son of Atreus chose their
    men and marshaled [<term xml:lang="grc">krinô</term>] them, while Athena went
    among them holding her priceless aegis that knows neither age nor death. From
    it there waved a hundred tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven, and each one
    of them worth a hundred oxen. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="450" unit="line"/>With this she darted furiously everywhere among
    the hosts of the Achaeans, urging them forward, and putting courage into the
    heart of each, so that he might fight and do battle without ceasing. Thus war
    became sweeter in their eyes even than returning home in their ships. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="455" unit="line"/>As when some great forest fire is raging upon a
    mountain top and its light is seen afar, even so as they marched the gleam of
    their armor flashed up into the firmament of heaven. They were like great
    flocks </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="460" unit="line"/>of geese, or cranes, or swans on the plain
    about the waters of Cayster, that wing their way hither and thither, glorying
    in the pride of flight, and crying as they settle till the fen is alive with
    their screaming. Even thus did their tribes pour from ships and tents </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="465" unit="line"/>on to the plain of the Skamandros, and the
    ground rang as brass under the feet of men and horses. They stood as thick upon
    the flower-bespangled field as leaves that bloom in season [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>]. As countless swarms of flies </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="470" unit="line"/>buzz around a herdsman's homestead in the
    season [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>] of spring when the pails are drenched
    with milk, even so did the Achaeans swarm on to the plain to charge the Trojans
    and destroy them. The chiefs disposed their men this way and that before the
    fight began, drafting them out </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="475" unit="line"/>as easily as goatherds draft their flocks when
    they have got mixed while feeding; and among them went King Agamemnon, with a
    head and face like Zeus the lord of thunder, a waist like Ares, and a chest
    like that of Poseidon. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="480" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="480" unit="line"/>As some great bull that lords it over the herds
    upon the plain, even so did Zeus make the son of Atreus stand peerless among
    the multitude of heroes. And now, O Muses, dwellers in the mansions of
    <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, tell me - </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="485" unit="line"/>for you are goddesses and are in all places so
    that you see all things, while we know nothing but by report [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] - who were the chiefs and princes of the
    Danaans? As for the common warriors, they were so that I could not name every
    single one of them though I had ten tongues, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="490" unit="line"/>and though my voice failed not and my heart
    were of bronze within me, unless you, O Olympian Muses, daughters of
    aegis-bearing Zeus, were to recount them to me. Nevertheless, I will tell the
    leaders of the ships and all the fleet together. Peneleos, Leitos, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="495" unit="line"/>Arkesilaos, Prothoenor, and Klonios were
    leaders of the Boeotians. These were they that dwelt in <placeName key="perseus,Hyria">Hyria</placeName> and rocky <placeName key="perseus,Aulis">Aulis</placeName>, and who held Schoinos, Skolos, and
    the highlands of Eteonos, with Thespeia, Graia, and the fair city of <placeName key="perseus,Mykalessos">Mykalessos</placeName>. They also held <placeName key="perseus,Harma">Harma</placeName>, Eilesium, and Erythrae; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="500" unit="line"/>and they had Eleon, Hyle, and Peteon; Ocalea
    and the strong fortress of <placeName key="perseus,Medeon">Medeon</placeName>;
    Copae, <placeName key="perseus,Eutresis">Eutresis</placeName>, and <placeName key="perseus,Thisbe">Thisbe</placeName> the haunt of doves; <placeName key="tgn,7011235">Coronea</placeName>, and the pastures of Haliartus;
    <placeName key="perseus,Plataea">Plataea</placeName> and <placeName key="perseus,Glisas">Glisas</placeName>; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="505" unit="line"/>the fortress of <placeName key="perseus,Thebes">Thebes</placeName> the less; holy <placeName key="perseus,Onchestos">Onchestos</placeName> with its famous grove of Poseidon; <placeName key="perseus,Arne">Arne</placeName> rich in vineyards; <placeName key="perseus,Midea">Midea</placeName>, sacred <placeName key="perseus,Nisa">Nisa</placeName>, and <placeName key="perseus,Anthedon">Anthedon</placeName> upon the sea. From these there came fifty ships, and
    in each </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="510" unit="line"/>there were a hundred and twenty young men of
    the Boeotians. Askalaphos and Ialmenos, sons of Ares, led the people that dwelt
    in <placeName key="perseus,Aspledon">Aspledon</placeName> and <placeName key="tgn,7011034">Orkhomenos</placeName> the realm of Minyas. Astyoche a
    noble maiden bore them in the house of Aktor son of Azeus; for she had gone
    with Ares secretly into an upper chamber, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="515" unit="line"/>and he had lain with her. With these there came
    thirty ships. The Phocaeans were led by Schedios and Epistrophos, sons of
    mighty Iphitos the son of Naubolos. These were they that held Cyparissus, rocky
    <placeName key="tgn,7010770">Pytho</placeName>, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="520" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="520" unit="line"/>holy <placeName key="tgn,7018211">Crisa</placeName>, <placeName key="perseus,Daulis">Daulis</placeName>, and
    Panopeus; they also that dwelt in Anemorea and <placeName key="perseus,Hyampolis">Hyampolis</placeName>, and about the waters of the
    river Kephissos, and Lilaea by the springs of the Kephissos; with their
    chieftains came forty ships, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="525" unit="line"/>and they marshaled the forces of the Phocaeans,
    which were stationed next to the Boeotians, on their left. Ajax, the fleet son
    of Oileus, commanded the Locrians. He was not so great, nor nearly so great, as
    Ajax the son of Telamon. He was a little man, and his breastplate was made of
    linen, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="530" unit="line"/>but in use of the spear he excelled all the
    Hellenes and the Achaeans. These dwelt in <placeName key="perseus,Cynus">Cynus</placeName>, Opous, Calliarus, Bessa, Scarphe, fair Augeae, Tarphe,
    and Thronium about the river Boagrios. With him there came forty ships </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="535" unit="line"/>of the Locrians who dwell beyond <placeName key="tgn,7002677">Euboea</placeName>. The fierce Abantes held <placeName key="tgn,7002677">Euboea</placeName> with its cities, <placeName key="tgn,7010882">Khalkis</placeName>, <placeName key="perseus,Eretria">Eretria</placeName>, Histiaea rich in vines, Cerinthus upon the sea, and
    the rock-perched town of <placeName key="perseus,Dion">Dion</placeName>; with
    them were also the men of <placeName key="perseus,Karystos">Karystos</placeName> and <placeName key="perseus,Styra">Styra</placeName>; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="540" unit="line"/>Elephenor of the race of Ares was in command of
    these; he was son of Khalkodon, and chief over all the Abantes. With him they
    came, fleet of foot and wearing their hair long behind, brave warriors, who
    would ever strive to tear open the corselets of their foes with their long
    ashen spears. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="545" unit="line"/>Of these there came fifty ships. And they that
    held the strong city of <placeName key="perseus,Athens">Athens</placeName>, the
    <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of great Erechtheus, who was born of the
    soil itself, but Zeus' daughter, Athena, fostered him, and established him at
    <placeName key="perseus,Athens">Athens</placeName> in her own rich
    sanctuary. There, year by year, the Athenian youths worship him </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="550" unit="line"/>with sacrifices of bulls and rams. These were
    commanded by Menestheus, son of Peteos. No man living could equal him in the
    marshaling of chariots and foot soldiers. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="555" unit="line"/>Nestor could alone rival him, for he was older.
    With him there came fifty ships. Ajax brought twelve ships from <placeName key="tgn,7002340">Salamis</placeName>, and stationed them alongside those of
    the Athenians. The men of <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>,
    again, and those who held the walls of <placeName key="perseus,Tiryns">Tiryns</placeName>, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="560" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="560" unit="line"/>with <placeName key="perseus,Hermione">Hermione</placeName>, and <placeName key="perseus,Asine">Asine</placeName>
    upon the gulf; Trozen, Eionae, and the vineyard lands of <placeName key="tgn,7011116">Epidaurus</placeName>; the Achaean youths, moreover, who
    came from <placeName key="tgn,7011087">Aegina</placeName> and <placeName key="perseus,Mases">Mases</placeName>; these were led by Diomedes of the
    loud battle-cry, and Sthenelos son of famed Kapaneus. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="565" unit="line"/>With them in command was Euryalos, son of king
    Mekisteus, son of Talaos; but Diomedes was chief over them all. With these
    there came eighty ships. Those who held the strong city of <placeName key="perseus,Mycenae">Mycenae</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="570" unit="line"/>rich <placeName key="perseus,Corinth">Corinth</placeName> and Cleonae; Orneae, Araethyrea, and Licyon, where
    Adrastos reigned of old; <placeName key="perseus,Hyperesia">Hyperesia</placeName>, high Gonoessa, and <placeName key="perseus,Pellene">Pellene</placeName>; Aegium </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="575" unit="line"/>and all the coast-land round about <placeName key="perseus,Helike">Helike</placeName>; these sent a hundred ships under
    the command of King Agamemnon, son of Atreus. His force was far both finest and
    most numerous, and in their midst was the king himself, all glorious in his
    armor of gleaming bronze - foremost among the heroes, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="580" unit="line"/>for he was the greatest king, and had most men
    under him. And those that dwelt in <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName>, lying low among the hills, Pharis, <placeName key="perseus,Sparta">Sparta</placeName>, with Messe the haunt of doves;
    <placeName key="perseus,Bryseae">Bryseae</placeName>, Augeae, Amyclae, and
    <placeName key="perseus,Helos">Helos</placeName> upon the sea; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="585" unit="line"/>
    <placeName key="tgn,1045022">Laas</placeName>, moreover, and Oetylus; these
    were led by Menelaos of the loud battle-cry, brother to Agamemnon, and of them
    there were sixty ships, drawn up apart from the others. Among them went
    Menelaos himself, strong in zeal, urging his men to fight; for he longed to </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="590" unit="line"/>avenge the toil and sorrow that he had suffered
    for the sake of Helen. The men of <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> and <placeName key="perseus,Arene">Arene</placeName>, and
    Thryum where is the ford of the river Alpheus; strong Aipy, Cyparisseis, and
    Amphigenea; Pteleum, <placeName key="perseus,Helos">Helos</placeName>, and
    Dorium, where the Muses </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="595" unit="line"/>met Thamyris, and stilled his minstrelsy for
    ever. He was returning from <placeName key="perseus,Oechalia">Oechalia</placeName>, where Eurytos lived and reigned, and boasted that he
    would surpass even the Muses, daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus, if they should
    sing against him; whereon they were angry, and maimed him. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="600" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="600" unit="line"/>They robbed him of his divine power of song,
    and thenceforth he could strike the lyre no more. These were commanded by
    Nestor, horseman of Gerene, and with him there came ninety ships. And those
    that held <placeName key="tgn,7002735">Arcadia</placeName>, under the high
    mountain of Cyllene, near the tomb of Aipytos, where the people fight hand to
    hand; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="605" unit="line"/>the men of Pheneus also, and <placeName key="tgn,7011034">Orkhomenos</placeName> rich in flocks; of Rhipae, Stratie,
    and bleak <placeName key="perseus,Enispe">Enispe</placeName>; of <placeName key="perseus,Tegea">Tegea</placeName> and fair <placeName key="perseus,Mantinea">Mantinea</placeName>; of Stymphelus and <placeName key="tgn,7017080">Parrhasia</placeName>; of these King Agapenor son of
    Ankaios was commander, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="610" unit="line"/>and they had sixty ships. Many Arcadians, good
    warriors, came in each one of them, but Agamemnon found them the ships in which
    to cross the sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>], for they were not a
    people that occupied their business upon the waters. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="615" unit="line"/>The men, moreover, of Bouprasion and of
    <placeName key="perseus,Elis">Elis</placeName>, so much of it as is enclosed
    between Hyrmine, Myrsinus upon the sea-shore, the rock Olene and Alesium. These
    had four leaders, and each of them had ten ships, with many Epeans on board. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="620" unit="line"/>Their leaders were Amphimakhos and Thalpios -
    the one, son of Kteatos, and the other, of Eurytos - both of the race of Aktor.
    The two others were Diores, son of Amarynkes, and Polyxenos, son of King
    Agasthenes, son of Augeas. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="625" unit="line"/>And those of Dulichium with the sacred Echinean
    islands, who dwelt beyond the sea off <placeName key="perseus,Elis">Elis</placeName>; these were led by Meges, peer of Ares, and the son of
    valiant Phyleus, dear to Zeus, who quarreled with his father, and went to
    settle in Dulichium. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="630" unit="line"/>With him there came forty ships. Odysseus led
    the brave Cephallenians, who held <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, Neritum with its forests, Crocylea, rugged Aegilips,
    <placeName key="tgn,7002673">Samos</placeName> and <placeName key="tgn,7011374">Zacynthus</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="635" unit="line"/>with the mainland also that was over against
    the islands. These were led by Odysseus, peer of Zeus in counsel, and with him
    there came twelve ships. Thoas, son of Andraimon, commanded the Aetolians, who
    dwelt in <placeName key="perseus,Pleuron">Pleuron</placeName>, <placeName key="perseus,Olenus">Olenus</placeName>, Pylene, </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="640" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="640" unit="line"/>
    <placeName key="tgn,7010882">Khalkis</placeName> by the sea, and rocky Calydon,
    for the great king Oeneus had now no sons living, and was himself dead, as was
    also golden-haired Meleager, who had been set over the Aetolians to be their
    king. And with Thoas there came forty ships. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="645" unit="line"/>The famous spearsman Idomeneus led the Cretans,
    who held <placeName key="perseus,Knossos">Knossos</placeName>, and the
    well-walled city of <placeName key="perseus,Gortys">Gortys</placeName>; Lyktos
    also, <placeName key="perseus,Miletus">Miletus</placeName> and <placeName key="perseus,Lykastos">Lykastos</placeName> that lies upon the chalk; the
    populous towns of <placeName key="perseus,Phaistos">Phaistos</placeName> and
    Rhytium, with the other peoples that dwelt in the hundred cities of <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName>. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="650" unit="line"/>All these were led by Idomeneus, and by
    Meriones, peer of murderous Ares. And with these there came eighty ships.
    Tlepolemos, son of Herakles, a man both brave and large of stature, brought
    nine ships of lordly warriors from <placeName key="tgn,7011266">Rhodes</placeName>. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="655" unit="line"/>These dwelt in <placeName key="tgn,7011266">Rhodes</placeName> which is divided among the three cities of <placeName key="perseus,Lindos">Lindos</placeName>, <placeName key="perseus,Ialysos">Ialysos</placeName>, and <placeName key="perseus,Kameiros">Kameiros</placeName>, that lies upon the chalk. These were commanded by
    Tlepolemos, son of mighty Herakles and born of Astyochea, whom he had carried
    off from <placeName key="perseus,Ephyra">Ephyra</placeName>, on the river
    Selleis, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="660" unit="line"/>after sacking many cities of valiant warriors.
    When Tlepolemos grew up, he killed his father's uncle Likymnios, who had been a
    famous warrior in his time, but was then grown old. On this he built himself a
    fleet, gathered a great following, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="665" unit="line"/>and fled beyond the sea [<term xml:lang="grc">pontos</term>], for he was menaced by the other sons and grandsons of
    Herakles. After a voyage. during which he suffered great hardship, he came to
    <placeName key="tgn,7011266">Rhodes</placeName>, where the people divided
    into three communities, according to their tribes, and were dearly loved by
    Zeus, the lord, of gods and men; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="670" unit="line"/>wherefore the son of Kronos showered down great
    riches upon them. And Nireus brought three ships from <placeName key="tgn,1008845">Syme</placeName> - Nireus, who was the handsomest man that
    came up under <placeName key="tgn,7002329">Ilion</placeName> of all the Danaans
    after the son of Peleus - </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="675" unit="line"/>but he was a man of no substance, and had but a
    small following. And those that held Nisyrus, <placeName key="tgn,7016628">Carpathus</placeName>, and Casus, with Cos, the city of Eurypylos, and the
    Calydnian islands, these were commanded by Pheidippos and Antiphos, two sons of
    King Thessalos the son of Herakles. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="680" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="680" unit="line"/>And with them there came thirty ships. Those
    again who held Pelasgian Argos, <placeName key="tgn,1085964">Alos</placeName>,
    Alope, and <placeName key="perseus,Trachis">Trachis</placeName>; and those of
    <placeName key="perseus,Phthia">Phthia</placeName> and <placeName key="tgn,1000074">Hellas</placeName> the land of fair women, who were called
    Myrmidons, Hellenes, and Achaeans; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="685" unit="line"/>these had fifty ships, over which Achilles was
    in command. But they now took no part in the war, inasmuch as there was no one
    to marshal them; for Achilles stayed by his ships, furious about the loss of
    the girl Briseis, whom he had taken from Lyrnessos at his own great peril, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="690" unit="line"/>when he had sacked Lyrnessos and Thebe, and had
    overthrown Mynes and Epistrophos, sons of king Euenor, son of Selepus. For her
    sake Achilles was still in grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>], but ere
    long he was again to join them. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="695" unit="line"/>And those that held Phylake and the flowery
    meadows of Pyrasus, sanctuary of Demeter ; <placeName key="perseus,Iton">Iton</placeName>, the mother of sheep; Antrum upon the sea, and Pteleum
    that lies upon the grass lands. Of these brave Protesilaos had been leader
    while he was yet alive, but he was now lying under the earth. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="700" unit="line"/>He had left a wife behind him in Phylake to
    tear her cheeks in sorrow, and his house was only half finished, for he was
    slain by a Dardanian warrior while leaping foremost of the Achaeans upon the
    soil of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>. Still, though his
    people mourned their chieftain, they were not without a leader, for Podarkes,
    of the race of Ares, marshaled them; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="705" unit="line"/>he was son of Iphiklos, rich in sheep, who was
    the son of Phylakos, and he was own brother to Protesilaos, only younger,
    Protesilaos being at once the elder and the more valiant. So the people were
    not without a leader, though they mourned him whom they had lost. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="710" unit="line"/>With him there came forty ships. And those that
    held <placeName key="perseus,Pherai">Pherai</placeName> by the Boebean lake,
    with Boebe, Glaphyrae, and the populous city of Iolkos, these with their eleven
    ships were led by Eumelos, son of Admetos, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="715" unit="line"/>whom Alcestis bore to him, loveliest of the
    daughters of Pelias. And those that held <placeName key="perseus,Methone">Methone</placeName> and Thaumacia, with Meliboia and rugged <placeName key="perseus,Olizon">Olizon</placeName>, these were led by the skillful
    archer Philoctetes, and they had seven ships, each with fifty oarsmen </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="720" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="720" unit="line"/>all of them good archers; but Philoctetes was
    lying in great pain in the Island of <placeName key="tgn,7011173">Lemnos</placeName>, where the sons of the Achaeans left him, for he had
    been bitten by a poisonous water snake. There he lay sick and in grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>], </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="725" unit="line"/>and full soon did the Argives come to miss him.
    But his people, though they felt his loss were not leaderless, for Medon, the
    bastard son of Oileus by Rhene, set them in array. Those, again, of <placeName key="tgn,1042238">Tricca</placeName> and the stony region of <placeName key="perseus,Ithome">Ithome</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="730" unit="line"/>and they that held <placeName key="perseus,Oechalia">Oechalia</placeName>, the city of Oechalian Eurytos,
    these were commanded by the two sons of Asklepios, skilled in the art of
    healing, Podaleirios and Machaon. And with them there came thirty ships. The
    men, moreover, of Ormenios, and by the fountain of Hypereia, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="735" unit="line"/>with those that held Asterios, and the white
    crests of Titanus, these were led by Eurypylos, the son of Euaemon, and with
    them there came forty ships. Those that held Argissa and Gyrtone, Orthe, Elone,
    and the white city of Oloosson, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="740" unit="line"/>of these brave Polypoites was leader. He was
    son of Peirithoos, who was son of Zeus himself, for Hippodameia bore him to
    Peirithoos on the day when he took his revenge on the shaggy mountain savages
    and drove them from Mount Pelion to the Aithikes. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="745" unit="line"/>But Polypoites was not sole in command, for
    with him was Leonteus, of the race of Ares, who was son of Koronos, the son of
    Kaineus. And with these there came forty ships. Guneus brought two and twenty
    ships from Cyphus, and he was followed by the Enienes and the valiant Peraebi, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="750" unit="line"/>who dwelt about wintry <placeName key="perseus,Dodona">Dodona</placeName>, and held the lands round the lovely
    river Titaresios, which sends its waters into the Peneus. They do not mingle
    with the silver eddies of the Peneus, but flow on the top of them like oil; </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="755" unit="line"/>for the Titaresios is a branch of dread Orcus
    and of the river Styx. Of the Magnetes, Prothoos son of Tenthredon was
    commander. They were they that dwelt about the river Peneus and Mount Pelion.
    Prothoos, fleet of foot, was their leader, and with him there came forty ships.
    </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="760" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="760" unit="line"/>Such were the chiefs and princes of the
    Danaans. Who, then, O Muse, was the foremost, whether man or horse, among those
    that followed after the sons of Atreus? Of the horses, those of the son of
    Pheres were by far the finest. They were driven by Eumelos, and were as fleet
    as birds. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="765" unit="line"/>They were of the same age and color, and
    perfectly matched in height. Apollo, of the silver bow, had bred them in Perea
    - both of them mares, and terrible as Ares in battle. Of the men, Ajax, son of
    Telamon, was much the foremost so long as Achilles' anger lasted, for Achilles
    excelled him greatly </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="770" unit="line"/>and he had also better horses; but Achilles was
    now holding aloof at his ships by reason of his quarrel with Agamemnon, and his
    people passed their time upon the sea shore, throwing discs or aiming with
    spears at a mark, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="775" unit="line"/>and in archery. Their horses stood each by his
    own chariot, champing lotus and wild celery. The chariots were housed under
    cover, but their owners, for lack of leadership, wandered hither and thither
    about the host and went not forth to fight. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="780" unit="line"/>Thus marched the host like a consuming fire,
    and the earth groaned beneath them when the lord of thunder is angry and lashes
    the land about Typhoeus among the Arimi, where they say Typhoeus lies. Even so
    did the earth groan beneath them </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="785" unit="line"/>as they sped over the plain. And now Iris,
    fleet as the wind, was sent by Zeus to tell the bad news among the Trojans.
    They were gathered in assembly, old and young, at Priam's gates, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="790" unit="line"/>and Iris came close up to Priam, speaking with
    the voice of Priam's son Polites, who, being fleet of foot, was stationed as
    watchman for the Trojans on the tomb of old Aisyetes, to look out for any sally
    of the Achaeans. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="795" unit="line"/>In his likeness Iris spoke, saying, "Old man,
    you talk idly, as in time of peace, while war is at hand. I have been in many a
    battle, but never yet saw such a host as is now advancing. They are crossing
    the plain to attack the city as </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="800" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="800" unit="line"/>thick as leaves or as the sands of the sea.
    Hektor, I charge you above all others, do as I say. There are many allies
    dispersed about the city of Priam from distant places and speaking divers
    tongues. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="805" unit="line"/>Therefore, let each chief give orders to his
    own people, setting them severally in array and leading them forth to battle."
    Thus she spoke, but Hektor knew that it was the goddess, and at once broke up
    the assembly. The men flew to arms; all the gates were opened, and the people
    thronged through them, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="810" unit="line"/>horse and foot, with the tramp as of a great
    multitude. Now there is a high mound before the city, rising by itself upon the
    plain. Men call it Batieia, but the gods know that it is the tomb [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>] of lithe Myrrhine. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="815" unit="line"/>Here the Trojans and their allies divided their
    forces. Priam's son, great Hektor of the gleaming helmet, commanded the
    Trojans, and with him were arrayed by far the greater number and most valiant
    of those who were longing for the fray. The Dardanians were led by brave </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="820" unit="line"/>Aeneas, whom Aphrodite bore to Anchises, when
    she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain slopes of Ida.
    He was not alone, for with him were the two sons of Antenor, Archilokhos and
    Akamas, both skilled in all the arts of war. They that dwelt in Telea under the
    lowest spurs of <placeName key="tgn,1105013">Mount Ida</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="825" unit="line"/>men of substance, who drink the limpid waters
    of the Aesepos, and are of Trojan blood - these were led by Pandaros son of
    Lykaon, whom Apollo had taught to use the bow. They that held Adrasteia and the
    district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] of Apaesus, with Pityeia, and the
    high mountain of Tereia - </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="830" unit="line"/>these were led by Adrastos and Amphios, whose
    breastplate was of linen. These were the sons of Merops of Perkote, who
    excelled in all kinds of divination. He told them not to take part in the war,
    but they gave him no heed, for fate lured them to destruction. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="835" unit="line"/>They that dwelt about Perkote and Praktios,
    with <placeName key="perseus,Sestos">Sestos</placeName>, <placeName key="tgn,6000031">Abydos</placeName>, and Arisbe - these were led by Asios,
    son of Hyrtakos, a brave commander - Asios, the son of Hyrtakos, whom his
    powerful dark bay steeds, of the breed that comes from the river Selleis, had
    brought from Arisbe. </p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.perseus-eng4:2"
title: "The _Iliad_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler
+++

<div type="textpart" n="840" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="840" unit="line"/>Hippothoos led the tribes of Pelasgian
    spearsmen, who dwelt in fertile Larissa - Hippothoos, and Pylaios of the race
    of Ares, two sons of the Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus. Akamas and the
    warrior Peirous commanded the Thracians </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="845" unit="line"/>and those that came from beyond the mighty
    stream of the <placeName key="tgn,7002638">Hellespont</placeName>. Euphemos,
    son of Troizenos, the son of <placeName key="tgn,7010867">Ceos</placeName>, was
    leader of the Ciconian spearsmen. Pyraikhmes led the Paeonian archers from
    distant <placeName key="perseus,Amydon">Amydon</placeName>, by the broad waters
    of the river <placeName key="tgn,7015932">Axios</placeName>, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="850" unit="line"/>the fairest that flow upon the earth. The
    Paphlagonians were commanded by stout-hearted Pylaimenes from Enetae, where the
    mules run wild in herds. These were they that held Cytorus and the country
    round Sesamus, with the cities by the river Parthenios, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="855" unit="line"/>Cromna, Aigialos, and lofty Erithinoi. Odios
    and Epistrophos were leaders over the Halizoni from distant Alybe, where there
    are mines of silver. Chromis, and Ennomos the augur, led the Mysians, but his
    skill in augury availed not to save him from destruction, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="860" unit="line"/>for he fell by the hand of the fleet descendant
    of Aiakos in the river, where he slew others also of the Trojans. Phorkys,
    again, and noble Askanios led the Phrygians from the far country of Askania,
    and both were eager for the fray. Mesthles and Antiphos commanded the Meonians, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="865" unit="line"/>sons of Talaimenes, born to him of the Gygaean
    lake. These led the Meonians, who dwelt under Mount Tmolos. Nastes led the
    Carians, men of a strange speech. These held <placeName key="perseus,Miletus">Miletus</placeName> and the wooded mountain of Phthires, with the water of
    the river <placeName key="tgn,1121561">Maeander</placeName> and the lofty
    crests of Mount Mycale. </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="870" unit="line"/>These were commanded by Nastes and Amphimakhos,
    the brave sons of Nomion. He came into the fight with gold about him, like a
    girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to save him, for he fell in
    the river by the hand of the fleet descendant of Aiakos, </p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="875" unit="line"/>and Achilles bore away his gold. Sarpedon and
    Glaukos led the Lycians from their distant land, by the eddying waters of the
    <placeName key="perseus,Xanthos">Xanthos</placeName>. </p>
    </div>

