+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:23"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Eurykleia now went upstairs laughing to tell her
    mistress that her dear husband had come home. Her aged knees became young again
    and her feet were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over
    her head to speak to her. "Wake up Penelope, my dear child," she exclaimed,
    "and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this long time
    past. Odysseus has at last indeed come home again, and has killed the suitors
    who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating up his estate and
    ill-treating his son."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="10" unit="line"/>"My good nurse," answered Penelope, "you must be
    mad. The gods sometimes send some very sensible people out of their minds, and
    make foolish people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing to
    you; for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you thus mock me
    when I have trouble enough already - talking such nonsense, and waking me up
    out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of my eyes and closed them? I
    have never slept so soundly from the day my poor husband went to that city with
    the ill-omened name. Go back again into the women's room; if it had been any
    one else, who had woke me up to bring me such absurd news I should have sent
    her away with a severe scolding. As it is, your age shall protect you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="25" unit="line"/>"My dear child," answered Eurykleia, "I am not
    mocking you. It is quite true as I tell you that Odysseus is come home again.
    He was the stranger whom they all kept on treating so badly in the room.
    Telemakhos knew all the time that he was come back, but kept his father's
    secret that he might have his revenge on all these wicked people.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="32" unit="line"/>Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw
    her arms round Eurykleia, and wept for joy. "But my dear nurse," said she,
    "explain this to me; if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage
    to overcome the wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them
    there always were?"</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:23"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="39" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="39" unit="line"/>"I was not there," answered Eurykleia, "and do
    not know; I only heard them groaning while they were being killed. We sat
    crouching and huddled up in a corner of the women's room with the doors closed,
    till your son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found
    Odysseus standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round him,
    one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you could have seen him
    standing there all bespattered with blood and filth, and looking just like a
    lion. But the corpses are now all piled up in the gatehouse that is in the
    outer court, and Odysseus has lit a great fire to purify the house with sulfur.
    He has sent me to call you, so come with me that you may both be happy together
    after all; for now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your
    husband is come home to find both wife and son alive and well, and to take his
    revenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="58" unit="line"/>"‘My dear nurse," said Penelope, "do not exult
    too confidently over all this. You know how delighted every one would be to see
    Odysseus come home - more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to
    both of us; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who is
    angry with the suitors for their great wickedness [<term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>], and has made an end of them; for they respected no man in
    the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came near them, who came near them,
    and they have come to a bad end in consequence of their iniquity. Odysseus is
    dead far away from the Achaean land; he will never return home again [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="69" unit="line"/>Then nurse Eurykleia said, "My child, what are
    you talking about? But you were all hard of belief and have made up your mind
    that your husband is never coming, although he is in the house and by his own
    fire side at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>]; when I was washing him I perceived the scar
    which the wild boar gave him, and I wanted to tell you about it, but in his
    wisdom [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] he would not let me, and clapped his
    hands over my mouth; so come with me and I will make this bargain with you - if
    I am deceiving you, you may have me killed by the cruelest death you can think
    of."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="80" unit="line"/>"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "however wise
    you may be you can hardly fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we
    will go in search of my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the
    man who has killed them."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:23"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="85" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="85" unit="line"/>On this she came down from her upper room, and
    while doing so she considered whether she should keep at a distance from her
    husband and question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and
    embrace him. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the room, she
    sat down opposite Odysseus by the fire, against the wall at right angles to
    that by which she had entered, while Odysseus sat near one of the
    bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see what his wife would
    say to him when she saw him. For a long time she sat silent and as one lost in
    amazement. At one moment she looked him full in the face, but then again
    directly, she was misled by his shabby clothes and failed to recognize him,
    till Telemakhos began to reproach her and said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="97" unit="line"/>"Mother - but you are so hard that I cannot call
    you by such a name - why do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do
    you not sit by his side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No
    other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to
    her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much; but
    your heart always was as hard as a stone."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="104" unit="line"/>Penelope answered, "My son, I am so lost in
    astonishment that I can find no words in which either to ask questions or to
    answer them. I cannot even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really
    is Odysseus come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one
    another better by and by, for there are tokens [<term xml:lang="grc">sêmata</term>] with which we two are alone acquainted, and which are hidden
    from all others."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="111" unit="line"/>Odysseus smiled at this, and said to
    Telemakhos, "Let your mother put me to any proof she likes; she will make up
    her mind about it presently. She rejects me for the moment and believes me to
    be somebody else, because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on;
    let us, however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killed
    another in a <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, even though he was not one who
    would leave many friends to take up his quarrel, the man who has killed him
    must still say good bye to his friends and flee the country; whereas we have
    been killing the stay of a whole city, and all the picked youth of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>. I would have you consider this
    matter."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:23"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="123" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="123" unit="line"/>"Look to it yourself, father," answered
    Telemakhos, "for they say you are the wisest counselor in the world, and that
    there is no other mortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with
    right good will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds
    out."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="129" unit="line"/>"I will say what I think will be best,"
    answered Odysseus. "First wash and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to
    go to their own room and dress; Phemios shall then strike up a dance tune on
    his lyre, so that if people outside hear, or any of the neighbors, or some one
    going along the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a wedding
    in the house, and no rumors [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] about the death
    of the suitors will get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods
    upon my own land. Once there, we will settle which of the courses of action
    [<term xml:lang="grc">kerdos</term>] heaven grants us shall seem
    wisest."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="141" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had
    said. First they washed and put their shirts on, while the women got ready.
    Then Phemios took his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately
    dance. The house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the
    people outside said, "I suppose the queen has been getting married at last. She
    ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her husband's
    property until he comes home."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="152" unit="line"/>This was what they said, but they did not know
    what it was that had been happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and
    anointed Odysseus in his own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Athena
    made him look taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow
    thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;
    she shed <term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term> about his head and shoulders just
    as a skillful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Hephaistos or
    Athena - and his work is full of <term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term> - enriches
    a piece of silver plate by gilding it. He came from the bath looking like one
    of the immortals, and sat down opposite his wife on the seat he had left. "My
    dear," said he, "heaven has endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman
    ever yet had. No other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he
    had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone
    through so much. But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I will sleep alone,
    for this woman has a heart as hard as iron."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:23"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="173" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="173" unit="line"/>"My dear," answered Penelope, "I have no wish
    to set myself up, nor to depreciate you; but I am not struck by your
    appearance, for I very well remember what kind of a man you were when you set
    sail from <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>. Nevertheless,
    Eurykleia, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he himself built. Bring
    the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it with fleeces, good
    coverlets, and blankets."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="181" unit="line"/>She said this to try him, but Odysseus was very
    angry and said, "Wife, I am much displeased at what you have just been saying.
    Who has been taking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have
    found it a hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some god
    came and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however strong and in
    his prime, who could move it from its place. For it was wrought to be a great
    sign [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>]; it is a marvelous curiosity which I
    made with my very own hands. There was a young olive growing within the
    precincts of the house, in full vigor, and about as thick as a bearing-post. I
    built my room round this with strong walls of stone and a roof to cover them,
    and I made the doors strong and well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of
    the olive tree and left the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the
    root upwards and then worked with carpenter's tools well and skillfully,
    straightening my work by drawing a line on the wood, and making it into a
    bed-prop. I then bored a hole down the middle, and made it the center-post of
    my bed, at which I worked till I had finished it, inlaying it with gold and
    silver; after this I stretched a hide of crimson leather from one side of it to
    the other. So you see I know all about this sign [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>], and I desire to learn whether it is still there, or whether
    any one has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at its roots."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="205" unit="line"/>When she heard the sure proofs [<term xml:lang="grc">sêmata</term>] Odysseus now gave her, she fairly broke down.
    She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and kissed him.
    "Do not be angry with me Odysseus," she cried, "you, who are the wisest of
    humankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has denied us the happiness of
    spending our youth, and of growing old, together; do not then be aggrieved or
    take it amiss that I did not embrace you thus as soon as I saw you. I have been
    shuddering all the time through fear that someone might come here and deceive
    me with a lying story; for there are many people who plan wicked schemes [<term xml:lang="grc">kerdea</term>]. Zeus’ daughter Helen would never have yielded
    herself to a man from a foreign country, if she had known that the sons of
    Achaeans would come after her and bring her back. Heaven put it in her heart to
    do wrong, and she gave no thought to that transgression [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>], which has been the source of all our sorrows [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>]. Now, however, that you have convinced me by
    showing that you know all the proofs [<term xml:lang="grc">sêmata</term>] of
    our bed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a single maid
    servant, the daughter of Aktor, who was given me by my father on my marriage,
    and who keeps the doors of our room), hard of belief though I have been, I can
    mistrust no longer."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="231" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus in his turn melted, and wept as
    he clasped his dear and faithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is
    welcome to men who are swimming towards the shore, when Poseidon has wrecked
    their ship with the fury of his winds and waves - a few alone reach the land,
    and these, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on firm
    ground and out of danger - even so was her husband welcome to her as she looked
    upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from about his neck. Indeed
    they would have gone on indulging their sorrow till rosy-fingered morn
    appeared, had not Athena determined otherwise, and held night back in the far
    west, while she would not suffer Dawn to leave Okeanos, nor to yoke the two
    steeds Lampos and Phaethon that bear her onward to break the day upon
    humankind.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:23"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="246" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="246" unit="line"/>At last, however, Odysseus said, "Wife, we have
    not yet reached the end of our trials [<term xml:lang="grc">athloi</term>]. I
    have an unknown amount of toil [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>] still to
    undergo. It is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the
    shade [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>] of Teiresias prophesied concerning
    me, on the day when I went down into Hades to ask about my return [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] and that of my companions. But now let us go
    to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="256" unit="line"/>"You shall go to bed as soon as you please,"
    replied Penelope, "now that the gods have sent you home to your own good house
    and to your country. But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell
    me about the task [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] that lies before you. I
    shall have to hear about it later, so it is better that I should be told at
    once."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="263" unit="line"/>"My dear," answered Odysseus, "why should you
    press me to tell you? Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will
    not like it. I do not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and
    wide, carrying an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never
    heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know nothing
    about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He gave me this certain
    token [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>] which I will not hide from you. He
    said that a wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing
    shovel that I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground
    and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Poseidon; after which I was to go
    home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the other. As for
    myself, he said that death should come to me from the sea, and that my life
    should ebb away very gently when I was full of years and peace of mind, and my
    people should be prosperous [<term xml:lang="grc">olbios</term>]. All this, he
    said, should surely come to pass."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="286" unit="line"/>And Penelope said, "If the gods are going to
    grant you a happier time in your old age, you may hope then to have some
    respite from misfortune."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:23"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="288" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="288" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and
    the nurse took torches and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as
    they had laid them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest,
    leaving the bed chamber woman Eurynome to show Odysseus and Penelope to bed by
    torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went back, and they
    then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed. Telemakhos, Philoitios,
    and the swineherd now left off dancing, and made the women leave off also. They
    then laid themselves down to sleep in the cloisters.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="300" unit="line"/>When Odysseus and Penelope had had their fill
    of love they fell talking with one another. She told him how much she had to
    bear in seeing the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed
    so many sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
    Odysseus in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much trouble he had
    himself given to other people. He told her everything, and she was so delighted
    to listen that she never went to sleep till he had ended his whole story.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="310" unit="line"/>He began with his victory over the Kikones, and
    how he thence reached the fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all
    about the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> and how he had
    punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave comrades; how he then
    went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably and furthered him on his way,
    but even so he was not to reach home, for to his great grief a gale carried him
    out to sea again; how he went on to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the
    people destroyed all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship
    only. Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to the
    chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost [<term xml:lang="grc">psukhê</term>]
    of the Theban seer Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his
    mother who bore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard
    the wondrous singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and
    terrible Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in safety;
    how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Zeus therefore struck
    the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men perished together, himself
    alone being left alive; how at last he reached the Ogygian island and the nymph
    Calypso, who kept him there in a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry
    her, in which case she intended making him immortal so that he should never
    grow old, but she could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much
    suffering he had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though
    he had been a god, and sent him back in a ship to his own country after having
    given him gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This was the last thing
    about which he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased the
    burden of his sorrows.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="344" unit="line"/>Then Athena thought of another matter. When she
    deemed that Odysseus had had enough both of his wife and of repose, she bade
    gold-enthroned Dawn rise out of Okeanos that she might shed light upon
    humankind. On this, Odysseus rose from his comfortable bed and said to
    Penelope, "Wife, we have both of us had our full share of trials [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], you, here, in lamenting my absence, and I in
    being prevented from getting home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] though I
    was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we have at last come
    together, take care of the property that is in the house. As for the sheep and
    goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will take many myself by force
    from other people, and will compel the Achaeans to make good the rest till they
    shall have filled all my yards. I am now going to the wooded lands out in the
    country to see my father who has so long been grieved on my account, and to
    yourself I will give these instructions, though you have little need of them.
    At sunrise it will at once get abroad that I have been killing the suitors; go
    upstairs, therefore, and stay there with your women. See nobody and ask no
    questions."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:23"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="366" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="366" unit="line"/>As he spoke he girded on his armor. Then he
    roused Telemakhos, Philoitios, and Eumaios, and told them all to put on their
    armor also. This they did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they
    opened the gates and sallied forth, Odysseus leading the way. It was now
    daylight, but Athena nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led them
    quickly out of the town. <milestone n="372" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

