+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Odysseus slept in the room upon an undressed
    bullock's hide, on the top of which he threw several skins of the sheep the
    suitors had eaten, and Eurynome threw a cloak over him after he had laid
    himself down. There, then, Odysseus lay wakefully brooding upon the way in
    which he should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in the
    habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house giggling and
    laughing with one another. This made Odysseus very angry, and he doubted
    whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and there, or to let
    them sleep one more and last time with the suitors. His heart growled within
    him, and as a bitch with puppies growls and shows her teeth when she sees a
    stranger, so did his heart growl with anger at the evil deeds that were being
    done: but he beat his breast and said, "Heart, be still, you had worse than
    this to bear on the day when the terrible <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> ate your brave companions; yet you bore it in silence
    till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you made sure of being
    killed."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="22" unit="line"/>Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it
    into endurance, but he tossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and
    fat in front of a hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other,
    that he may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did he turn himself
    about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as he was, he
    should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wicked suitors. But by
    and by Athena came down from heaven in the likeness of a woman, and hovered
    over his head saying, "My poor unhappy man, why do you lie awake in this way?
    This is your house: your wife is safe inside it, and so is your son who is just
    such a young man as any father may be proud of."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="36" unit="line"/>"Goddess," answered Odysseus, "all that you have
    said is true, but I am in some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these
    wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always are.
    And there is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable.
    Supposing that with Zeus’ and your assistance I succeed in killing them, I must
    ask you to consider where I am to escape to from their avengers when it is all
    over."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="44" unit="line"/>"For shame," replied Athena, "why, any one else
    would trust a worse ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal
    and less wise than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you
    throughout in all your ordeals [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>]? I tell you
    plainly that even though there were fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager
    to kill us, you should take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away
    with you. But go to sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and
    you shall be out of your troubles before long."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="54" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="54" unit="line"/>As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and
    then went back to <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="56" unit="line"/>While Odysseus was thus yielding himself to a
    very deep slumber that eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife
    awoke, and sitting up in her bed began to cry. When she had relieved herself by
    weeping she prayed to Artemis saying, "Great Goddess Artemis, daughter of Zeus,
    drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch me up
    and bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into the mouths of
    overflowing Okeanos, as it did the daughters of Pandareus. The daughters of
    Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods killed them, so they were
    left orphans. But Aphrodite took care of them, and fed them on cheese, honey,
    and sweet wine. Hera taught them to excel all women in beauty of form and
    understanding; Artemis gave them an imposing presence, and Athena endowed them
    with every kind of accomplishment; but one day when Aphrodite had gone up to
    <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName> to see Zeus about getting
    them married (for well does he know both what shall happen and what not happen
    to every one) the storm winds came and spirited them away to become handmaids
    to the dread Erinyes. Even so I wish that the gods who live in heaven would
    hide me from mortal sight, or that fair Artemis might strike me, for I would
    fain go even beneath the sad earth if I might do so still looking towards
    Odysseus only, and without having to yield myself to a worse man than he was.
    Besides, no matter how many people may grieve by day, they can put up with it
    so long as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed in slumber
    people forget good and ill alike; whereas my miserable <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> haunts me even in my dreams. This very night I thought there
    was one lying by my side who was like Odysseus as he was when he went away with
    his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was no dream, but the very
    truth itself."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="91" unit="line"/>On this the day broke, but Odysseus heard the
    sound of her weeping, and it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already
    knew him and was by his side. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on
    which he had lain, and set them on a seat in the room, but he took the
    bullock's hide out into the open. He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed,
    saying "Father Zeus, since you have seen fit to bring me over land and sea to
    my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me, give me a sign out
    of the mouth of some one or other of those who are now waking within the house,
    and let me have another sign of some kind from outside."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="102" unit="line"/>Thus did he pray. Zeus heard his prayer and
    forthwith thundered high up among the from the splendor of <placeName key="tgn,7011019">Olympus</placeName>, and Odysseus was glad when he heard
    it. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from hard by in the mill
    room lifted up her voice and gave him another sign. There were twelve
    miller-women whose business it was to grind wheat and barley which are the
    staff of life. The others had ground their task and had gone to take their
    rest, but this one had not yet finished, for she was not so strong as they
    were, and when she heard the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign
    [<term xml:lang="grc">sêma</term>] to her master. "Father Zeus," said she,
    "you who rule over heaven and earth, you have thundered from a clear sky
    without so much as a cloud in it, and this means something for somebody; answer
    the prayer, then, of me your poor servant who calls upon you, and let this be
    the very last day that the suitors dine in the house of Odysseus. They have
    worn me out with the labor of grinding meal for them, and I hope they may never
    have another dinner anywhere at all."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="120" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="120" unit="line"/>Odysseus was glad when he heard the omens
    conveyed to him by the woman's speech, and by the thunder, for he knew they
    meant that he should avenge himself on the suitors.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="122" unit="line"/>Then the other maids in the house rose and lit
    the fire on the hearth; Telemakhos also rose and put on his clothes. He girded
    his sword about his shoulder, bound his sandals on his comely feet, and took a
    doughty spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the threshold
    of the room and said to Eurykleia, "Nurse, did you make the stranger
    comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let him shift for
    himself? - for my mother, good woman though she is, has a way of paying great
    attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting others who are in reality
    much better men."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="134" unit="line"/>"Do not find fault, child," said Eurykleia,
    "when there is no one to find fault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine
    as long as he liked: your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread
    and he said he would not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants to
    make one for him, but he said he was such a wretched outcast that he would not
    sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having an undressed bullock's
    hide and some sheepskins put for him in the room and I threw a cloak over him
    myself."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="144" unit="line"/>Then Telemakhos went out of the court to the
    place where the Achaeans were meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his
    hand, and he was not alone, for his two dogs went with him. But Eurykleia
    called the maids and said, "Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and
    sprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the seats; wipe
    down the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean out the mixing-jugs and
    the cups, and for water from the fountain at once; the suitors will be here
    directly; they will be here early, for it is a feast day."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="157" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="157" unit="line"/>Thus did she speak, and they did even as she
    had said: twenty of them went to the fountain for water, and the others set
    themselves busily to work about the house. The men who were in attendance on
    the suitors also came up and began chopping firewood. By and by the women
    returned from the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three
    best pigs he could pick out. These he let feed about the premises, and then he
    said with good humor to Odysseus, "Stranger, are the suitors treating you any
    better now, or are they as insolent as ever?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="169" unit="line"/>"May heaven," answered Odysseus, "requite to
    them the wickedness with which they deal high-handedly in another man's house
    without any sense of shame [<term xml:lang="grc">aidôs</term>]."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="172" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthios
    the goatherd came up, for he too was bringing in his best goats for the
    suitors’ dinner; and he had two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up
    under the gatehouse, and then Melanthios began gibing at Odysseus. "Are you
    still here, stranger," said he, "to pester people by begging about the house?
    Why can you not go elsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understanding
    before we have given each other a taste of our fists. You beg without any sense
    of decency [<term xml:lang="grc">kosmos</term>]: are there not feasts elsewhere
    among the Achaeans, as well as here?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="183" unit="line"/>Odysseus made no answer, but bowed his head and
    brooded. Then a third man, Philoitios, joined them, who was bringing in a
    barren heifer and some goats. These were brought over by the boatmen who are
    there to take people over when any one comes to them. So Philoitios made his
    heifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to the
    swineherd. "Who, Swineherd," said he, "is this stranger that is lately come
    here? Is he one of your men? What is his family? Where does he come from? Poor
    fellow, he looks as if he had been some great man, but the gods give sorrow to
    whom they will - even to kings if it so pleases them</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="197" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="197" unit="line"/>As he spoke he went up to Odysseus and saluted
    him with his right hand; "Good day to you, father stranger," said he, "you seem
    to be very poorly off now, but I hope you will have better times [<term xml:lang="grc">olbos</term>] by and by. Father Zeus, of all gods you are the
    most malicious. We are your own children, yet you show us no mercy in all our
    misery and afflictions. A sweat came over me when I saw this man, and my eyes
    filled with tears, for he reminds me of Odysseus, who I fear is going about in
    just such rags as this man's are, if indeed he is still among the living. If he
    is already dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master, who
    made me his stockman when I was quite young in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of the Cephallênians, and now his cattle are countless; no one
    could have done better with them than I have, for they have bred like ears of
    wheat; nevertheless I have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who take
    no heed of his son though he is in the house, and fear not the wrath of heaven,
    but are already eager to divide Odysseus’ property among them because he has
    been away so long. I have often thought - only it would not be right while his
    son is living - of going off with the cattle to some foreign <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>; bad as this would be, it is still harder to
    stay here and be ill-treated about other people's herds. My position is
    intolerable, and I should long since have run away and put myself under the
    protection of some other chief, only that I believe my poor master will yet
    return, and send all these suitors fleeing out of the house."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="226" unit="line"/>"Stockman," answered Odysseus, "you seem to be
    a very well-disposed person, and I can see that you are a man of sense.
    Therefore I will tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath: by Zeus, the
    chief of all gods, and by that hearth of Odysseus to which I am now come,
    Odysseus shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you
    shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="235" unit="line"/>"If Zeus were to bring this to pass," replied
    the stockman, "you should see how I would do my very utmost to help him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="238" unit="line"/>And in like manner Eumaios prayed that Odysseus
    might return home.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="240" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="240" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors
    were hatching a plot to murder Telemakhos: but a bird flew near them on their
    left hand - an eagle with a dove in its talons. On this Amphinomos said, "My
    friends, this plot of ours to murder Telemakhos will not succeed; let us go to
    dinner instead."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="247" unit="line"/>The others assented, so they went inside and
    laid their cloaks on the benches and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats,
    pigs, and the heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them
    round. They mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every
    man his cup, while Philoitios handed round the bread in the breadbaskets, and
    Melanthios poured them out their wine. Then they laid their hands upon the good
    things that were before them.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="257" unit="line"/>Telemakhos deliberately [<term xml:lang="grc">kerdos</term>] made Odysseus sit in the part of the room that was paved
    with stone; he gave him a shabby-looking seat at a little table to himself, and
    had his portion of the inward meats brought to him, with his wine in a gold
    cup. "Sit there," said he, "and drink your wine among the great people. I will
    put a stop to the gibes and blows of the suitors, for this is no public house,
    but belongs to Odysseus, and has passed from him to me. Therefore, suitors,
    keep your hands and your tongues to yourselves, or there will be trouble."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="268" unit="line"/>The suitors bit their lips, and marveled at the
    boldness of his speech; then Antinoos said, "We do not like such language but
    we will put up with it, for Telemakhos is threatening us in good earnest. If
    Zeus had let us we should have put a stop to his brave talk ere now."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="275" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="275" unit="line"/>Thus spoke Antinoos, but Telemakhos heeded him
    not. Meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city,
    and the Achaeans gathered under the shady grove of Apollo.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="279" unit="line"/>Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off
    the spits, gave every man his portion, and feasted to their hearts’ content;
    those who waited at table gave Odysseus exactly the same portion as the others
    had, for Telemakhos had told them to do so.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="284" unit="line"/>But Athena would not let the suitors for one
    moment drop their insolence, for she wanted Odysseus to become still more
    bitter [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] against them. Now there happened to
    be among them a ribald fellow, whose name was Ktesippos, and who came from
    Same. This man, confident in his great wealth, was paying court to the wife of
    Odysseus, and said to the suitors, "Hear what I have to say. The stranger has
    already had as large a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not
    right nor reasonable [<term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>] to ill-treat any
    guest of Telemakhos who comes here. I will, however, make him a present on my
    own account, that he may have something to give to the bath-woman, or to some
    other of Odysseus’ servants."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="299" unit="line"/>As he spoke he picked up a heifer's foot from
    the meat-basket in which it lay, and threw it at Odysseus, but Odysseus turned
    his head a little aside, and avoided it, smiling sardonically as he did so, and
    it hit the wall, not him. On this Telemakhos spoke fiercely to Ktesippos, "It
    is a good thing for you," said he, "that the stranger turned his head so that
    you missed him. If you had hit him I should have run you through with my spear,
    and your father would have had to see about getting you buried rather than
    married in this house. So let me have no more unseemly behavior from any of
    you, for I am grown up now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand
    what is going on, instead of being the child that I have been heretofore. I
    have long seen you killing my sheep and making free with my grain and wine: I
    have put up with this, for one man is no match for many, but do me no further
    violence. Still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would far rather die than
    see such disgraceful scenes day after day - guests insulted, and men dragging
    the women servants about the house in an unseemly way."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="320" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="320" unit="line"/>They all held their peace till at last Agelaos
    son of Damastor said, "No one should take offense at what has just been said,
    nor gainsay it, for it is quite reasonable [<term xml:lang="grc">dikaios</term>]. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating the stranger, or any one
    else of the servants who are about the house; I would say, however, a friendly
    word to Telemakhos and his mother, which I trust may commend itself to both.
    ‘As long,’ I would say, ‘as you had ground for hoping that Odysseus would one
    day come home, there will be no <term xml:lang="grc">nemesis</term> as a result
    of your waiting and suffering the suitors to be in your house. It would have
    been better that he should have returned, but it is now sufficiently clear that
    he will never do so; therefore talk all this quietly over with your mother, and
    tell her to marry the best man, and the one who makes her the most advantageous
    offer. Thus you will yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to
    eat and drink in peace, while your mother will look after some other man's
    house, not yours."’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="338" unit="line"/>To this Telemakhos answered, "By Zeus, Agelaos,
    and by the sorrows of my unhappy father, who has either perished far from
    <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, or is wandering in some
    distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my mother's marriage; on the
    contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she will, and I will give her
    numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare not insist point blank that she
    shall leave the house against her own wishes. Heaven forbid that I should do
    this."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="345" unit="line"/>Athena now made the suitors fall to laughing
    immoderately, and set their wits wandering; but they were laughing with a
    forced laughter. Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with
    tears, and their hearts were heavy with forebodings. Theoklymenos saw this and
    said, "Unhappy men, what is it that ails you? There is a shroud of darkness
    drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with tears; the air is
    alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams drip blood; the gate of the
    cloisters and the court beyond them are full of ghosts trooping down into the
    night of Hades; the sun is blotted out of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over
    all the land."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="358" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed
    heartily. Eurymakhos then said, "This stranger who has lately come here has
    lost his senses. Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so
    dark here."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:20"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="363" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="363" unit="line"/>But Theoklymenos said, "Eurymakhos, you need
    not send any one with me. I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to
    say nothing of an understanding mind [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>]. I will
    take these out of the house with me, for I see mischief overhanging you, from
    which not one of you men who are insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the
    house of Odysseus will be able to escape."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="371" unit="line"/>He left the house as he spoke, and went back to
    Peiraios who gave him welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and
    provoking Telemakhos by laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said to
    him, "Telemakhos, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this
    importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no skill for work
    or for hard fighting [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>], but is perfectly
    useless, and now here is another fellow who is setting himself up as a seer.
    Let me persuade you, for it will be much better, to put them on board ship and
    send them off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="384" unit="line"/>Telemakhos gave him no heed, but sat silently
    watching his father, expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon
    the suitors.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="387" unit="line"/>Meanwhile the daughter of Ikarios, wise
    Penelope, had had a rich seat placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so
    that she could hear what every one was saying. The dinner indeed had been
    prepared amid merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had
    sacrificed many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing can be
    conceived more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and a brave man were soon
    to lay before them - for they had brought their doom upon themselves.
    <milestone n="394" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

