+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>They reached the low lying city of <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName>, where they drove straight to the
    halls of Menelaos. They found him in his own house, feasting with his many
    clansmen in honor of the wedding of his son, and also of his daughter, whom he
    was marrying to the son of that valiant warrior Achilles. He had given his
    consent and promised her to him while he was still at <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and now the gods were bringing the
    marriage about; so he was sending her with chariots and horses to the city of
    the Myrmidons over whom Achilles’ son was reigning. For his only son he had
    found a bride from <placeName key="perseus,Sparta">Sparta</placeName>, daughter
    of Alektor. This son, Megapenthes, was born to him of a bondwoman, for heaven
    granted Helen no more children after she had borne Hermione, who was fair as
    golden Aphrodite herself.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="15" unit="line"/>So the neighbors and kinsmen of Menelaos were
    feasting and making merry in his house. There was a singer also to sing to them
    and play his lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of
    them when the man struck up with his tune.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="20" unit="line"/>Telemakhos and the son of Nestor stayed their
    horses at the gate, whereon Eteoneus servant to Menelaos came out, and as soon
    as he saw them ran hurrying back into the house to tell his Master. He went
    close up to him and said, "Menelaos, there are some strangers come here, two
    men, who look like sons of Zeus. What are we to do? Shall we take their horses
    out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as they best can?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="30" unit="line"/>Menelaos was very angry and said, "Eteoneus, son
    of Boethoos, you never used to be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton.
    Take their horses out, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have
    supper; you and I have stayed often enough at other people's houses before we
    got back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peace henceforward."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="37" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="37" unit="line"/>So Eteoneus bustled back and bade other servants
    come with him. They took their sweating hands from under the yoke, made them
    fast to the mangers, and gave them a feed of oats and barley mixed. Then they
    leaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led the way into
    the house. Telemakhos and Peisistratos were astonished when they saw it, for
    its splendor was as that of the sun and moon; then, when they had admired
    everything to their heart's content, they went into the bath room and washed
    themselves.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="49" unit="line"/>When the servants had washed them and anointed
    them with oil, they brought them woolen cloaks and shirts, and the two took
    their seats by the side of Menelaos. A maidservant brought them water in a
    beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their
    hands; and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them
    bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, while
    the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold by
    their side.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="59" unit="line"/>Menelaos then greeted them saying, "Eat up, and
    welcome; when you have finished supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage
    of such men as you cannot have been lost. You must be descended from a line of
    scepter-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as you are."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="65" unit="line"/>On this he handed them a piece of fat roast
    loin, which had been set near him as being a prime part, and they laid their
    hands on the good things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough
    to eat and drink, Telemakhos said to the son of Nestor, with his head so close
    that no one might hear, "Look, Peisistratos, man after my own heart, see the
    gleam of bronze and gold - of amber, ivory, and silver. Everything is so
    splendid that it is like seeing the palace of Olympian Zeus. I am lost in
    admiration."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="76" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="76" unit="line"/>Menelaos overheard him and said, "No one, my
    sons, can hold his own with Zeus, for his house and everything about him is
    immortal; but among mortal men - well, there may be another who has as much
    wealth as I have, or there may not; but at all events I have traveled much and
    have undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before I could get
    home with my fleet. I went to <placeName key="tgn,1000112">Cyprus</placeName>,
    <placeName key="tgn,6004687">Phoenicia</placeName> and the Egyptians; I went
    also to the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, and the Erembians, and to <placeName key="tgn,1000172">Libya</placeName> where the lambs have horns as soon as
    they are born, and the sheep bear lambs three times a year. Every one in that
    country, whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good milk, for
    the ewes yield all the year round. But while I was traveling and getting great
    riches among these people, my brother was secretly and shockingly murdered
    through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so that I have no pleasure in being
    lord of all this wealth. Whoever your parents may be they must have told you
    about all this, and of my heavy loss in the ruin of a stately mansion fully and
    magnificently furnished. Would that I had only a third of what I now have so
    that I had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plain
    of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, far from <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>. I often grieve, as I sit here in my
    house, for one and all of them. At times I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently
    I leave off again, for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it. Yet
    grieve for these as I may, I do so for one man more than for them all. I cannot
    even think of him without loathing both food and sleep, so miserable does he
    make me, for no one of all the Achaeans worked so hard or risked so much as he
    did. He took nothing by it, and has left a legacy of sorrow [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] to myself, for he has been gone a long time,
    and we know not whether he is alive or dead. His old father, his long-suffering
    wife Penelope, and his son Telemakhos, whom he left behind him an infant in
    arms, are plunged in grief on his account."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="113" unit="line"/>Thus spoke Menelaos, and the heart of
    Telemakhos yearned as he bethought him of his father. Tears fell from his eyes
    as he heard him thus mentioned, so that he held his cloak before his face with
    both hands. When Menelaos saw this he doubted whether to let him choose his own
    time for speaking, or to ask him at once and find what it was all about.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="120" unit="line"/>While he was thus in two minds Helen came down
    from her high-vaulted and perfumed room, looking as lovely as Artemis herself.
    Adraste brought her a seat, Alkippe a soft woolen rug, while Phylo fetched her
    the silver work-box which Alkandra wife of Polybos had given her. Polybos lived
    in Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world; he gave
    Menelaos two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and ten talents of gold;
    besides all this, his wife gave Helen some beautiful presents, to wit, a golden
    distaff, and a silver work-box that ran on wheels, with a gold band round the
    top of it. Phylo now placed this by her side, full of fine spun yarn, and a
    distaff charged with violet colored wool was laid upon the top of it. Then
    Helen took her seat, put her feet upon the footstool, and began to question her
    husband.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="138" unit="line"/>"Do we know, Menelaos," said she, "the names of
    these strangers who have come to visit us? Shall I guess right or wrong? But I
    cannot help saying what I think. Never yet have I seen either man or woman so
    like somebody else (indeed when I look at him I hardly know what to think) as
    this young man is like Telemakhos, whom Odysseus left as a baby behind him,
    when you Achaeans went to <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> with
    battle in your hearts, on account of my most shameless self."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="147" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="147" unit="line"/>"My dear wife," replied Menelaos, "I see the
    likeness just as you do. His hands and feet are just like Odysseus’ so is his
    hair, with the shape of his head and the expression of his eyes. Moreover, when
    I was talking about Odysseus, and saying how much he had suffered on my
    account, tears fell from his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantle."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="155" unit="line"/>Then Peisistratos said, "Menelaos, son of
    Atreus, you are right in thinking that this young man is Telemakhos, but he is
    very modest, and is ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with
    one whose conversation is so divinely interesting as your own. My father,
    Nestor, sent me to escort him hither, for he wanted to know whether you could
    give him any counsel or suggestion. A son has always trouble at home when his
    father has gone away leaving him without supporters; and this is how Telemakhos
    is now placed, for his father is absent, and there is no one among his own
    <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> to stand by him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="168" unit="line"/>"Bless my heart," replied Menelaos; "then I am
    receiving a visit from the son of a very dear friend, who suffered much
    hardship [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] for my sake. I had always hoped
    to entertain him with most marked distinction when heaven had granted us a safe
    return [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] from beyond the seas. I should have
    founded a city for him in <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>, and
    built him a house. I should have made him leave <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> with his goods, his son, and all his people, and should
    have sacked for them some one of the neighboring cities that are subject to me.
    We should thus have seen one another continually, and nothing but death could
    have interrupted so close and happy an intercourse. I suppose, however, that
    heaven grudged us such good fortune, for it has prevented the poor man from
    ever getting home at all."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="183" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and his words set them all
    to weeping. Helen wept, Telemakhos wept, and so did Menelaos, nor could
    Peisistratos keep his eyes from filling, when he remembered his dear brother
    Antilokhos whom the son of bright Dawn had killed. Thereon he said to
    Menelaos,</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="190" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="190" unit="line"/>"Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk
    about you at home, told me you were a person of rare and excellent
    understanding. If, then, it be possible, do as I would urge you. I am not fond
    of crying while I am getting my supper. Morning will come in due course, and in
    the forenoon I care not how much I cry for those that are dead and gone. This
    is all we can do for the poor things. We can only shave our heads for them and
    wring the tears from our cheeks. I had a brother who died at <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>; he was by no means the worst man there;
    you are sure to have known him - his name was Antilokhos; I never set eyes upon
    him myself, but they say that he was singularly fleet of foot and in fight
    valiant."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="203" unit="line"/>"Your discretion, my friend," answered
    Menelaos, "is beyond your years. It is plain you take after your father. One
    can soon see when a man is son to one whom Zeus grants blessedness [<term xml:lang="grc">olbos</term>] both as regards wife and offspring - and he has
    blessed Nestor from first to last all his days, giving him a green old age in
    his own house, with sons about him who are both well disposed and valiant. We
    will put an end therefore to all this weeping, and attend to our supper again.
    Let water be poured over our hands. Telemakhos and I can talk with one another
    fully in the morning."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="216" unit="line"/>On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured
    water over their hands and they laid their hands on the good things that were
    before them.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="219" unit="line"/>Then Zeus’ daughter Helen bethought her of
    another matter. She drugged the wine with the herb <term xml:lang="grc">nêpenthes</term> [= anti-<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>], which
    banishes all care, sorrow, and anger. Whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot
    shed a single tear all the rest of the day, not even though his father and
    mother both of them drop down dead, or he sees a brother or a son hewn in
    pieces before his very eyes. This drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had
    been given to Helen by Polydamna wife of <placeName key="tgn,1130814">Thon</placeName>, a woman of <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>, where there grow all sorts of herbs, some good to put into
    the mixing-bowl and others poisonous. Moreover, every one in the whole country
    is a skilled physician, for they are of the race of Paieon. When Helen had put
    this drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round, she
    said:</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="235" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="235" unit="line"/>"Menelaos, son of Atreus, and you my good
    friends, sons of honorable men (which is as Zeus wills, for he is the giver
    both of good and evil, and can do what he chooses), feast here as you will, and
    listen while I tell you a tale in season. I cannot indeed name every single one
    of the exploits [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] of Odysseus, but I can say
    what he did when he was in the Trojan <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, and
    you Achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties. He covered himself with wounds
    and bruises, dressed himself all in rags, and entered the enemy's city looking
    like a menial or a beggar, quite different from how he looked when he was among
    his own people. In this disguise he entered the city of <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and no one said anything to him. I
    alone recognized him and began to question him, but he was too cunning for me.
    When, however, I had washed and anointed him and had given him clothes, and
    after I had sworn a solemn oath not to betray him to the Trojans till he had
    got safely back to his own camp and to the ships, he explained to me the whole
    <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term> of the Achaeans. He killed many Trojans and
    got much information before he reached the <placeName key="tgn,5001993">Argive</placeName> camp, for all which things the Trojan women made
    lamentation, but for my own part I was glad, for my heart was beginning to long
    after my home, and I was unhappy about the wrong [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>] that Aphrodite had done me in taking me over there, away from
    my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who is indeed by no means
    deficient either in looks or understanding."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="265" unit="line"/>Then Menelaos said, "All that you have been
    saying, my dear wife, is true. I have traveled much, and have learned the plans
    and <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term> of many a hero, but I have never seen such
    another man as Odysseus. What endurance too, and what courage he displayed
    within the wooden horse, wherein all the bravest of the Argives were lying in
    wait to bring death and destruction upon the Trojans. At that moment you came
    up to us; some <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> who wished well to the
    Trojans must have set you on to it and you had Deiphobos with you. Three times
    did you go all round our hiding place and pat it; you called our chiefs each by
    his own name, and mimicked all our wives. Diomedes, Odysseus, and I from our
    seats inside heard what a noise you made. Diomedes and I could not make up our
    minds whether to spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, but
    Odysseus held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all except Antiklos, who
    was beginning to answer you, when Odysseus clapped his two brawny hands over
    his mouth, and kept them there. It was this that saved us all, for he muzzled
    Antiklos till Athena took you away again."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="290" unit="line"/>"How sad," exclaimed Telemakhos, "that all this
    was of no avail to save him, nor yet his own iron courage. But now, sir, be
    pleased to send us all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon
    of sleep."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="296" unit="line"/>On this Helen told the maid servants to set
    beds in the room that was in the gatehouse, and to make them with good red
    rugs, and spread coverlets on the top of them with woolen cloaks for the guests
    to wear. So the maids went out, carrying a torch, and made the beds, to which a
    man-servant presently conducted the strangers. Thus, then, did Telemakhos and
    Peisistratos sleep there in the forecourt, while the son of Atreus lay in an
    inner room with lovely Helen by his side.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="306" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="306" unit="line"/>When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
    appeared, Menelaos rose and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his
    comely feet, girded his sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking
    like an immortal god. Then, taking a seat near Telemakhos he said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="312" unit="line"/>"And what, Telemakhos, has led you to take this
    long sea voyage to <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName>? Are you
    on public or private business? Tell me all about it."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="315" unit="line"/>"I have come, sir replied Telemakhos, "to see
    if you can tell me anything about my father. I am being eaten out of house and
    home; my fair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who in
    overweening <term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term> keep killing great numbers of my
    sheep and oxen, on the pretense of wooing my mother. Therefore, I am suppliant
    at your knees if haply you may tell me about my father's melancholy end,
    whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveler;
    for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out of any pity for
    myself, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw. If my brave father
    Odysseus ever did you loyal service either by word or deed, when you Achaeans
    were harassed in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of the Trojans, bear it
    in mind now as in my favor and tell me truly all."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="332" unit="line"/>Menelaos on hearing this was very much shocked.
    "So," he exclaimed, "these cowards would usurp a brave man's bed? A hind might
    as well lay her new born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed
    in the forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when he comes back to his lair
    will make short work with the pair of them - and so will Odysseus with these
    suitors. By father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo, if Odysseus is still the man that
    he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in <placeName key="tgn,7002672">Lesbos</placeName>, and threw him so heavily that all the Achaeans cheered
    him - if he is still such and were to come near these suitors, they would have
    a swift doom and a sorry wedding. As regards your questions, however, I will
    not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you without concealment all that
    the old man of the sea told me.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="351" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="351" unit="line"/>"I was trying to come on here, but the gods
    detained me in <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>, for my hecatombs
    had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are very strict about having
    their dues. Now off <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>, about as
    far as a ship can sail in a day with a good stiff breeze behind her, there is
    an island called Pharos - it has a good harbor from which vessels can get out
    into open sea when they have taken in water - and the gods becalmed me twenty
    days without so much as a breath of fair wind to help me forward. We should
    have run clean out of provisions and my men would have starved, if a goddess
    had not taken pity upon me and saved me in the person of Eidothea, daughter to
    Proteus, the old man of the sea, for she had taken a great fancy to me.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="367" unit="line"/>"She came to me one day when I was by myself,
    as I often was, for the men used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the
    island in the hope of catching a fish or two to save them from the pangs of
    hunger. ‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘it seems to me that you like starving in this
    way - at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here day after
    day, without even trying to get away though your men are dying by inches.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="375" unit="line"/>"‘Let me tell you,’ said I, ‘whichever of the
    goddesses you may happen to be, that I am not staying here of my own accord,
    but must have offended the gods that live in heaven. Tell me, therefore, for
    the gods know everything: which of the immortals it is that is hindering me in
    this way, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]?’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="382" unit="line"/>"‘Stranger,’ replied she, ‘I will make it all
    quite clear to you. There is an old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts
    and whose name is Proteus. He is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father;
    he is Poseidon's head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottom of
    the sea. If you can snare him and hold him tight, he will tell you about your
    voyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are to sail the sea so as to
    reach your home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]. He will also tell you, if
    you so will, all that has been going on at your house both good and bad, while
    you have been away on your long and dangerous journey.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="394" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="394" unit="line"/>"‘Can you show me,’ said I, ‘some strategy by
    means of which I may catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding
    me out? For a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> is not easily caught - not by
    a mortal man.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="398" unit="line"/>"‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘I will make it all
    quite clear to you. About the time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven,
    the old man of the sea comes up from under the waves, heralded by the West wind
    that furs the water over his head. As soon as he has come up he lies down, and
    goes to sleep in a great sea cave, where the seals - (Halosydne's chickens as
    they call them) - come up also from the gray sea, and go to sleep in shoals all
    round him; and a very strong and fish-like smell do they bring with them. Early
    tomorrow morning I will take you to this place and will lay you in ambush. Pick
    out [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>], therefore, the three best men you have
    in your fleet, and I will tell you all the tricks that the old man will play
    you.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="411" unit="line"/>"‘First he will look over all his seals, and
    count them; then, when he has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers,
    he will go to sleep among them, as a shepherd among his sheep. The moment you
    see that he is asleep seize him; put forth all your strength [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] and hold him fast, for he will do his very utmost
    to get away from you. He will turn himself into every kind of creature that
    goes upon the earth, and will become also both fire and water; but you must
    hold him fast and grip him tighter and tighter, till he begins to talk to you
    and comes back to what he was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may
    slacken your hold [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] and let him go; and you can
    ask him which of the gods it is that is angry with you, and what you must do to
    reach your home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] over the fishy sea.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="425" unit="line"/>"Having so said she dived under the waves,
    whereon I turned back to the place where my ships were ranged upon the shore;
    and my heart was clouded with care as I went along. When I reached my ship we
    got supper ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="431" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="431" unit="line"/>"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
    appeared, I took the three men on whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely,
    and went along by the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven. Meanwhile the
    goddess fetched me up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, all of them
    just skinned, for she meant to play a trick upon her father. Then she dug four
    pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till we should come up. When we
    were close to her, she made us lie down in the pits one after the other, and
    threw a seal skin over each of us. Our ambuscade would have been intolerable,
    for the stench of the fishy seals was most distressing - who would go to bed
    with a sea monster if he could help it?-but here, too, the goddess helped us,
    and thought of something that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia
    under each man's nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of
    the seals.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="447" unit="line"/>"We waited the whole morning and made the best
    of it, watching the seals come up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till
    at noon the old man of the sea came up too, and when he had found his fat seals
    he went over them and counted them. We were among the first he counted, and he
    never suspected any guile, but laid himself down to sleep as soon as he had
    done counting. Then we rushed upon him with a shout and seized him; on which he
    began at once with his old tricks, and changed himself first into a lion with a
    great mane; then all of a sudden he became a dragon, a leopard, a wild boar;
    the next moment he was running water, and then again directly he was a tree,
    but we stuck to him and never lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature
    became distressed, and said, Which of the gods was it, Son of Atreus, that
    hatched this plot with you for snaring me and seizing me against my will? What
    do you want?’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="464" unit="line"/>"‘You know that yourself, old man,’ I answered.
    ‘You will gain nothing by trying to put me off. It is because I have been kept
    so long in this island, and see no sign of my being able to get away. I am
    losing all heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the
    immortals it is that is hindering me, and tell me also how I may sail the sea
    so as to reach my home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]?’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="471" unit="line"/>"Then,’ he said, ‘if you would finish your
    voyage and get home quickly, you must offer sacrifices to Zeus and to the rest
    of the gods before embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to
    your friends, and to your own house, till you have returned to the heaven-fed
    stream of <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>, and offered holy
    hecatombs to the immortal gods that reign in heaven. When you have done this
    they will let you finish your voyage.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="481" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="481" unit="line"/>"I was broken-hearted when I heard that I must
    go back all that long and terrible voyage to <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>; nevertheless, I answered, ‘I will do all, old man, that
    you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell me true, whether all the
    Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us when we set sail from <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> have got home safely, or whether any one
    of them came to a bad end either on board his own ship or among his friends
    when the days of his fighting were done.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="491" unit="line"/>"‘Son of Atreus,’ he answered, ‘why ask me? You
    had better not know my <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>, for your eyes will
    surely fill when you have heard my story. Many of those about whom you ask are
    dead and gone, but many still remain, and only two of the chief men among the
    Achaeans perished during their return home. As for what happened on the field
    of battle - you were there yourself. A third Achaean leader is still at sea,
    alive, but hindered from returning [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]. Ajax
    was wrecked, for Poseidon drove him on to the great rocks of Gyrae;
    nevertheless, he let him get safe out of the water, and in spite of all
    Athena's hatred he would have escaped death, if he had not ruined himself by
    boasting. He said the gods could not drown him even though they had tried to do
    so, and when Poseidon heard this large talk, he seized his trident in his two
    brawny hands, and split the rock of Gyrae in two pieces. The base remained
    where it was, but the part on which Ajax was sitting fell headlong into the sea
    and carried Ajax with it; so he drank salt water and was drowned.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="512" unit="line"/>"‘Your brother and his ships escaped, for Hera
    protected him, but when he was just about to reach the high promontory of
    Malea, he was caught by a heavy gale which carried him out to sea again sorely
    against his will, and drove him to the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell,
    but where Aigisthos was then living. By and by, however, it seemed as though he
    was to return [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>] safely after all, for the
    gods backed the wind into its old quarter and they reached home; whereon
    Agamemnon kissed his native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in
    his own country.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="524" unit="line"/>"‘Now there was a watchman whom Aigisthos kept
    always on the watch, and to whom he had promised two talents of gold. This man
    had been looking out for a whole year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give
    him the slip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon go by, he
    went and told Aigisthos who at once began to lay a plot for him. He picked
    [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>] twenty of his bravest warriors from the
    <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> and placed them in ambuscade on one side
    the room, while on the opposite side he prepared a banquet. Then he sent his
    chariots and horsemen to Agamemnon, and invited him to the feast, but he meant
    foul play. He got him there, all unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting
    him, and killed him when the banquet was over as though he were butchering an
    ox in the shambles; not one of Agamemnon's followers was left alive, nor yet
    one of Aigisthos’, but they were all killed there in the cloisters.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="538" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="538" unit="line"/>"Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted
    as I heard him. I sat down upon the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no
    longer bear to live nor look upon the light of the sun. Presently, when I had
    had my fill of weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea
    said, ‘Son of Atreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly; it can
    do no manner of good; find your way home as fast as ever you can, for Aigisthos
    be still alive, and even though Orestes anticipates you in killing him, you may
    yet come in for his funeral.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="548" unit="line"/>"On this I took comfort in spite of all my
    sorrow, and said, ‘I know, then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the
    third man of whom you spoke; is he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get
    home? Or is he dead? Tell me, no matter how much it may grieve me.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="554" unit="line"/>"‘The third man,’ he answered, ‘is Odysseus who
    dwells in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>. I can see him in an
    island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who is keeping him
    prisoner, and he cannot reach his home for he has no ships nor sailors to take
    him over the sea. As for your own end, Menelaos, you shall not die in
    <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>, but the gods will take you
    to the Elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world. There fair-haired
    Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than any where else in the
    world, for in Elysium there falls not rain, nor hail, nor snow, but Okeanos
    breathes ever with a West wind that sings softly from the sea, and gives fresh
    life to all men. This will happen to you because you have married Helen, and
    are Zeus’ son-in-law.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="570" unit="line"/>"As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon
    I turned back to the ships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with
    care as I went along. When we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night
    was falling, and camped down upon the beach. When the child of morning,
    rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and put our
    masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves, took our seats on
    the benches, and smote the gray sea with our oars. I again stationed my ships
    in the heaven-fed stream of <placeName key="tgn,7016833">Egypt</placeName>, and
    offered hecatombs that were full and sufficient. When I had thus appeased
    heaven's anger, I raised a tomb to the memory of Agamemnon that his <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> might be inextinguishable, after which I had a
    quick passage home, for the gods sent me a fair wind.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="587" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="587" unit="line"/>"And now for yourself - stay here some ten or
    twelve days longer, and I will then speed you on your way. I will make you a
    noble present of a chariot and three horses. I will also give you a beautiful
    chalice that so long as you live you may think of me whenever you make a
    drink-offering to the immortal gods."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="593" unit="line"/>"Son of Atreus," replied Telemakhos, "do not
    press me to stay longer; I should be contented to remain with you for another
    twelve months; I find your conversation so delightful that I should never once
    wish myself at home with my parents; but my crew whom I have left at <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> are already impatient, and you are
    detaining me from them. As for any present you may be disposed to make me, I
    had rather that it should he a piece of plate. I will take no horses back with
    me to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>, but will leave them to
    adorn your own stables, for you have much flat ground in your kingdom where
    lotus thrives, as also meadowsweet and wheat and barley, and oats with their
    white and spreading ears; whereas in <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the
    country is more fit for goats than horses, and I like it the better for that.
    None of our islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> least of all."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="609" unit="line"/>Menelaos smiled and took Telemakhos’ hand
    within his own. "What you say," said he, "shows that you come of good family. I
    both can, and will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and
    most precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing-bowl by
    Hephaistos’ own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with
    gold. Phaidimos, king of the Sidonians, gave it me in the course of a visit
    which I paid him when I returned there on my homeward journey. I will make you
    a present of it."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="620" unit="line"/>Thus did they converse as guests kept coming to
    the king's house. They brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up
    bread for them to take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in
    the courts.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="625" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="625" unit="line"/>Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or
    aiming with spears at a mark on the leveled ground in front of Odysseus’ house,
    and were behaving with all their old <term xml:lang="grc">hubris</term>.
    Antinoos and Eurymakhos, who were their ringleaders and much the foremost in
    <term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term> among them all, were sitting together when
    Noemon son of Phronios came up and said to Antinoos,</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="632" unit="line"/>"Have we any idea, Antinoos, on what day
    Telemakhos returns from <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>? He
    has a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to <placeName key="perseus,Elis">Elis</placeName>: I have twelve brood mares there with
    yearling mule foals by their side not yet broken in, and I want to bring one of
    them over here and break him."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="638" unit="line"/>They were astounded when they heard this, for
    they had made sure that Telemakhos had not gone to the city of Neleus. They
    thought he was only away somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or
    with the swineherd; so Antinoos said, "When did he go? Tell me truly, and what
    young men did he take with him? Were they freemen or his own bondsmen - for he
    might manage that too? Tell me also, did you let him have the ship of your own
    free will because he asked you, or did he take it by force [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] without your leave?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="648" unit="line"/>"I lent it him," answered Noemon. "What else
    could I do when a man of his position said he was in a difficulty and asked me
    to oblige him? I could not possibly refuse. As for those who went with him they
    were the best young men we have in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, and I
    saw Mentor go on board as leader - or some god who was exactly like him. I
    cannot understand it, for I saw Mentor here myself yesterday morning, and yet
    he was then setting out for <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName>."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="657" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="657" unit="line"/>Noemon then went back to his father's house,
    but Antinoos and Eurymakhos were very angry. They told the others to leave off
    competing [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], and to come and sit down along
    with themselves. When they came, Antinoos son of Eupeithes spoke in anger. His
    heart was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="663" unit="line"/>"Good heavens, this voyage of Telemakhos is a
    very serious matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing, but the
    young man has got away in spite of us, and with a crew picked [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>] from the best of the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>, too. He will be giving us trouble presently; may Zeus destroy
    him with violence [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>] before he is full grown.
    Find me a ship, therefore, with a crew of twenty men, and I will lie in wait
    for him in the straits between <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>
    and <placeName key="tgn,7002673">Samos</placeName>; he will then rue the day
    that he set out to try and get news of his father."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="673" unit="line"/>Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his
    saying; they then all of them went inside the buildings.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="675" unit="line"/>It was not long ere Penelope came to know what
    the suitors were plotting; for a man servant, Medon, overheard them from
    outside the outer court as they were laying their schemes within, and went to
    tell his mistress. As he crossed the threshold of her room Penelope said:
    "Medon, what have the suitors sent you here for? Is it to tell the maids to
    leave their master's business and cook dinner for them? I wish they may neither
    woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhere else, but let this be the
    very last time, for the waste you all make of my son's estate. Did not your
    fathers tell you when you were children how good Odysseus had been to them -
    never doing anything high-handed, nor speaking harshly to anybody in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>? Such is the justice [<term xml:lang="grc">dikê</term>] of divine kings: they may take a fancy to one man and dislike
    another, but Odysseus never did an unjust thing by anybody - which shows what
    bad hearts you have, and that there is no such thing as gratitude [<term xml:lang="grc">kharis</term>] left in this world."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="696" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="696" unit="line"/>Then Medon said, "I wish, my lady, that this
    were all; but they are plotting something much more dreadful now - may heaven
    frustrate their design. They are going to try and murder Telemakhos as he is
    coming home from <placeName key="perseus,Pylos">Pylos</placeName> and
    <placeName key="tgn,7011065">Lacedaemon</placeName>, where he has been to
    get news of his father."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="703" unit="line"/>Then Penelope's heart sank within her, and for
    a long time she was speechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find
    no utterance. At last, however, she said, "Why did my son leave me? What
    business had he to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over the
    ocean like sea-horses? Does he want to die without leaving any one behind him
    to keep up his name?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="711" unit="line"/>"I do not know," answered Medon, "whether some
    god set him on to it, or whether he went on his own impulse to see if he could
    find out if his father was dead, or alive and on his way home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="715" unit="line"/>Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope
    in an agony of grief [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>]. There were plenty of
    seats in the house, but she had no heart for sitting on any one of them; she
    could only fling herself on the floor of her own room and cry; whereon all the
    maids in the house, both old and young, gathered round her and began to cry
    too, till at last in a transport of sorrow she exclaimed,</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="722" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="722" unit="line"/>"My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me
    with more affliction than any other woman of my age and country. First I lost
    my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>] under heaven, and whose <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> was great over all <placeName key="tgn,1000074">Hellas</placeName> and middle <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>; and now my darling son is at the mercy of the winds and
    waves, without my having heard one word about his leaving home. You hussies,
    there was not one of you would so much as think of giving me a call out of my
    bed, though you all of you very well knew when he was starting. If I had known
    he meant taking this voyage, he would have had to give it up, no matter how
    much he was bent upon it, or leave me a corpse behind him - one or other. Now,
    however, go some of you and call old Dolios, who was given me by my father on
    my marriage, and who is my gardener. Bid him go at once and tell everything to
    <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, who may be able to hit
    on some plan for enlisting public sympathy on our side, as against those who
    are trying to exterminate his own race and that of Odysseus."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="742" unit="line"/>Then the dear old nurse Eurykleia said, "You
    may kill me, my lady, or let me live on in your house, whichever you please,
    but I will tell you the real truth. I knew all about it, and gave him
    everything he wanted in the way of bread and wine, but he made me take my
    solemn oath that I would not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days,
    unless you asked or happened to hear of his having gone, for he did not want
    you to spoil your beauty by crying. And now, my lady, wash your face, change
    your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer prayers to Athena,
    daughter of Aegis-bearing Zeus, for she can save him even though he be in the
    jaws of death. Do not trouble Laertes: he has trouble enough already. Besides,
    I cannot think that the gods hate the race of the son of Arceisius so much, but
    there will be a son left to come up after him, and inherit both the house and
    the fair fields that lie far all round it."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="758" unit="line"/>With these words she made her mistress leave
    off crying, and dried the tears from her eyes. Penelope washed her face,
    changed her dress, and went upstairs with her maids. She then put some bruised
    barley into a basket and began praying to Athena.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="762" unit="line"/>"Hear me," she cried, "Daughter of
    Aegis-bearing Zeus, unweariable. If ever Odysseus while he was here burned you
    fat thigh bones of sheep or heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favor, and
    save my darling son from the villainy of the suitors."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="767" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="767" unit="line"/>She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess
    heard her prayer; meanwhile the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered
    room, and one of them said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="770" unit="line"/>"The queen is preparing for her marriage with
    one or other of us. Little does she dream that her son has now been doomed to
    die."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="772" unit="line"/>This was what they said, but they did not know
    what was going to happen. Then Antinoos said, "Comrades, let there be no loud
    talking, lest some of it get carried inside. Let us be up and do that in
    silence, about which we are all of a mind."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="778" unit="line"/>He then chose [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>] twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to the sea
    side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and sails inside
    her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all
    in due course, and spread the white sails aloft, while their fine servants
    brought them their armor. Then they made the ship fast a little way out, came
    on shore again, got their suppers, and waited till night should fall.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="787" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="787" unit="line"/>But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs
    unable to eat or drink, and wondering whether her brave son would escape, or be
    overpowered by the wicked suitors. Like a lioness caught in the toils with
    huntsmen hemming her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank
    into a slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="795" unit="line"/>Then Athena bethought her of another matter,
    and made a vision in the likeness of Penelope's sister Iphthime daughter of
    Ikarios who had married Eumelos and lived in <placeName key="perseus,Pherai">Pherai</placeName>. She told the vision to go to the house of Odysseus, and
    to make Penelope leave off crying, so it came into her room by the hole through
    which the thong went for pulling the door to, and hovered over her head,
    saying,</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="804" unit="line"/>"You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at
    ease will not suffer you to weep and be so sad. Your son has done them no
    wrong, so he will yet come back to you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="808" unit="line"/>Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates
    of dreamland, answered, "Sister, why have you come here? You do not come very
    often, but I suppose that is because you live such a long way off. Am I, then,
    to leave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me? I,
    who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality
    [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>] under heaven, and whose <term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term> was great over all <placeName key="tgn,1000074">Hellas</placeName> and middle <placeName key="perseus,Argos">Argos</placeName>; and now my darling son has gone off on board of a ship -
    a foolish man who has never been used to undergoing ordeals [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>], nor to going about among gatherings of men. I
    am even more anxious about him than about my husband; I am all in a tremble
    when I think of him, lest something should happen to him, either from the
    people in the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> where he has gone, or at sea,
    for he has many enemies who are plotting against him, and are bent on killing
    him before he can return home."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="824" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="824" unit="line"/>Then the vision said, "Take heart, and be not
    so much dismayed. There is one gone with him whom many a man would be glad
    enough to have stand by his side, I mean Athena; it is she who has compassion
    upon you, and who has sent me to bear you this message."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="830" unit="line"/>"Then," said Penelope, "if you are a god or
    have been sent here by divine commission, tell me also about that other unhappy
    one - is he still alive, or is he already dead and in the house of Hades?"</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="835" unit="line"/>And the vision said, "I shall not tell you for
    certain whether he is alive or dead, and there is no use in idle
    conversation."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="838" unit="line"/>Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the
    door and was dissipated into thin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep
    refreshed and comforted, so vivid had been her dream.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:4"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="842" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="842" unit="line"/>Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed
    their ways over the sea, intent on murdering Telemakhos. Now there is a rocky
    islet called Asteris, of no great size, in mid channel between <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> and <placeName key="tgn,7002673">Samos</placeName>, and there is a harbor on either side of it where a ship
    can lie. Here then the Achaeans placed themselves in ambush.</p>
    </div>

