+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>"After we were clear of the river Okeanos, and
    had got out into the open sea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island
    where there is dawn and sunrise as in other places. We then drew our ship on to
    the sands and disembarked onto the shore, where we went to sleep and waited
    till day should break.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="8" unit="line"/>"Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered
    Dawn, appeared, I sent some men to Circe's house to fetch the body of Elpenor.
    We cut firewood from a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and
    after we had wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites.
    When his body and armor had been burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set a
    stone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that he had been
    used to row with.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="16" unit="line"/>"While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew
    that we had got back from the house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as
    fast as she could; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat,
    and wine. Then she stood in the midst of us and said, ‘You have done a bold
    thing in going down alive to the house of Hades, and you will have died twice,
    to other people's once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the day, feast
    your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow morning. In the
    meantime I will tell Odysseus about your course, and will explain everything to
    him so as to prevent your suffering from misadventure either by land or
    sea.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="28" unit="line"/>"We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted
    through the livelong day to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set
    and it came on dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables
    of the ship. Then Circe took me by the hand and bade me be seated away from the
    others, while she reclined by my side and asked me all about our
    adventures.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="37" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="37" unit="line"/>"‘So far so good,’ said she, when I had ended my
    story, ‘and now pay attention to what I am about to tell you - heaven itself,
    indeed, will recall it to your recollection. First you will come to the Sirens
    who enchant all who come near them. If any one unwarily draws in too close and
    hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will never welcome him
    home again, for they sit in a green field and warble him to death with the
    sweetness of their song. There is a great heap of dead men's bones lying all
    around, with the flesh still rotting off them. Therefore pass these Sirens by,
    and stop your men's ears with wax that none of them may hear; but if you like
    you can listen yourself, for you may get the men to bind you as you stand
    upright on a cross-piece half way up the mast, and they must lash the rope's
    ends to the mast itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. If you
    beg and pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="55" unit="line"/>"‘When your crew have taken you past these
    Sirens, I cannot give you coherent directions as to which of two courses you
    are to take; I will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider
    them for yourself. On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against
    which the seething deep waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the
    blessed gods call these rocks the Wanderers. Here not even a bird may pass, no,
    not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to Father Zeus, but the sheer rock
    always carries off one of them, and Father Zeus has to send another to make up
    their number; no ship that ever yet came to these rocks has got away again, but
    the waves and whirlwinds of fire are freighted with wreckage and with the
    bodies of dead men. The only vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the
    famous <placeName key="tgn,2136830">Argo</placeName> on her way from the house
    of Aietes, and she too would have gone against these great rocks, only that
    Hera piloted her past them for the love she bore to Jason.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="73" unit="line"/>"‘Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and
    its peak is lost in a dark cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is
    never clear not even in summer and early autumn. No man though he had twenty
    hands and twenty feet could get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs
    sheer up, as smooth as though it had been polished. In the middle of it there
    is a large cavern, looking West and turned towards Erebus; you must take your
    ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even the stoutest archer
    could send an arrow into it. Inside it Scylla sits and yelps with a voice that
    you might take to be that of a young hound, but in truth she is a dreadful
    monster and no one - not even a god - could face her without being
    terror-struck. She has twelve misshapen feet, and six necks of the most
    prodigious length; and at the end of each neck she has a frightful head with
    three rows of teeth in each, all set very close together, so that they would
    crunch any one to death in a moment, and she sits deep within her shady cell
    thrusting out her heads and peering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or
    dogfish or any larger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with which
    Amphitrite teems. No ship ever yet got past her without losing some men, for
    she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off a man in each mouth.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="101" unit="line"/>"‘You will find the other rocks lie lower, but
    they are so close together that there is not more than a bowshot between them.
    [A large fig tree in full leaf grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking
    whirlpool of Charybdis. Three times in the day does she vomit forth her waters,
    and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not there when she
    is sucking, for if you are, Poseidon himself could not save you; you must hug
    the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you can, for you had better lose
    six men than your whole crew.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="111" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="111" unit="line"/>"‘Is there no way,’ said I, ‘of escaping
    Charybdis, and at the same time keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm
    my men?’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="115" unit="line"/>"‘You dare-devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you
    are always wanting to fight somebody or something and to undergo an ordeal
    [<term xml:lang="grc">ponos</term>]; you will not let yourself be beaten
    even by the immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,
    extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your best chance
    will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle about her rock
    while you are putting on your armor, she may catch you with a second cast of
    her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of your men; so drive your ship
    past her at full speed, and roar out lustily to Krataiis who is Scylla's dam,
    bad luck to her; she will then stop her from making a second raid upon you.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="127" unit="line"/>"‘You will now come to the Thrinacian island,
    and here you will see many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the
    sun-god - seven herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in
    each flock. They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they are
    tended by the goddesses Phaethousa and Lampetie, who are children of the
    sun-god Hyperion by Neaira. Their mother when she had borne them and had done
    suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian island, which was a long way off, to
    live there and look after their father's flocks and herds. If you leave these
    flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but homecoming [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>], you may yet after much hardship reach <placeName key="tgn,7013803">Ithaca</placeName>; but if you harm them, then I forewarn
    you of the destruction both of your ship and of your comrades; and even though
    you may yourself escape, you will return late, in bad plight, after losing all
    your men.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="142" unit="line"/>"Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold
    began to show in heaven, whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and
    told my men to loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her,
    took their places, and began to smite the gray sea with their oars. Presently
    the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a fair wind that blew
    dead aft, and stayed steadily with us, keeping our sails well filled, so we did
    whatever wanted doing to the ship's gear, and let her go as wind and helmsman
    headed her.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="153" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="153" unit="line"/>"Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to
    my men, ‘My friends, it is not right that one or two of us alone should know
    the prophecies that Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so
    that whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she said we
    were to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully in a field
    of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long as no one else did.
    Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece half way up the mast; bind me
    as I stand upright, with a bond so fast that I cannot possibly break away, and
    lash the rope's ends to the mast itself. If I beg and pray you to set me free,
    then bind me more tightly still.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="165" unit="line"/>"I had hardly finished telling everything to
    the men before we reached the island of the two Sirens, for the wind had been
    very favorable. Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath
    of wind nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed
    them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam they
    raised in rowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax and cut it up small
    with my sword. Then I kneaded the wax in my strong hands till it became soft,
    which it soon did between the kneading and the rays of the sun-god son of
    Hyperion. Then I stopped the ears of all my men, and they bound me hands and
    feet to the mast as I stood upright on the crosspiece; but they went on rowing
    themselves. When we had got within earshot of the land, and the ship was going
    at a good rate, the Sirens saw that we were getting in shore and began with
    their singing.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="184" unit="line"/>"‘Come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned Odysseus,
    honor to the Achaean name, and listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed
    past us without staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song - and he
    who listens will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the
    ills that the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before <placeName key="tgn,7014164">Troy</placeName>, and can tell you everything that is
    going to happen over the whole world.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="192" unit="line"/>"They sang these words most musically, and as I
    longed to hear them further I made by frowning to my men that they should set
    me free; but they quickened their stroke, and Eurylokhos and Perimedes bound me
    with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of the Sirens’ voices.
    Then my men took the wax from their ears and unbound me.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="201" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="201" unit="line"/>"Immediately after we had got past the island I
    saw a great wave from which spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound.
    The men were so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole
    sea resounded with the rushing of the waters, but the ship stayed where it was,
    for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore, and exhorted them man
    by man not to lose heart.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="208" unit="line"/>"‘My friends,’ said I, ‘this is not the first
    time that we have been in danger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as
    when the <placeName key="tgn,2236678">Cyclops</placeName> shut us up in his
    cave by forceful violence [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>]; nevertheless, my
    courage [<term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>] and wise counsel [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>] saved us then, and we shall live to look back on
    all this as well. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say, trust in <placeName key="tgn,2786910">Zeus</placeName> and row on with might and main. As for
    you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them, for the ship is in your
    hands; turn her head away from these steaming rapids and hug the rock, or she
    will give you the slip and be over yonder before you know where you are, and
    you will be the death of us.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="222" unit="line"/>"So they did as I told them; but I said nothing
    about the awful monster Scylla, for I knew the men would not go on rowing if I
    did, but would huddle together in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey
    Circe's strict instructions - I put on my armor. Then seizing two strong spears
    I took my stand on the ship's bows, for it was there that I expected first to
    see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much harm; but I could not
    make her out anywhere, though I strained my eyes with looking the gloomy rock
    all over and over.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="234" unit="line"/>"Then we entered the Straits in great fear of
    mind, for on the one hand was Scylla, and on the other dread <placeName key="tgn,2233588">Charybdis</placeName> kept sucking up the salt water. As
    she vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron when it is boiling over
    upon a great fire, and the spray reached the top of the rocks on either side.
    When she began to suck again, we could see the water all inside whirling round
    and round, and it made a deafening sound as it broke against the rocks. We
    could see the bottom of the whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men
    were at their wit's ends for fear. While we were taken up with this, and were
    expecting each moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and
    violently [<term xml:lang="grc">biê</term>]<term xml:lang="grc"/> snatched up
    my six best men. I was looking at once after both ship and men, and in a moment
    I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me, struggling in the air as
    Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard them call out my name in one last
    despairing cry. As a fisherman, seated, spear in hand, upon some jutting rock
    throws bait into the water to deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them
    with the ox's horn with which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to
    the land as he catches them one by one - even so did Scylla land these panting
    creatures on her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they
    screamed and stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony. This was
    the most sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="260" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="260" unit="line"/>"When we had passed the Wandering rocks, with
    Scylla and terrible <placeName key="tgn,2233588">Charybdis</placeName>, we
    reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the goodly cattle and sheep
    belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still at sea in my ship I could bear the
    cattle lowing as they came home to the yards, and the sheep bleating. Then I
    remembered what the blind Theban seer [<term xml:lang="grc">mantis</term>]
    Teiresias had told me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe had warned me to shun the
    island of the blessed sun-god. So being much troubled I said to the men, ‘My
    men, I know you are hard pressed, but listen while I tell you the prophecy that
    Teiresias made me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the island
    of the blessed sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would
    lie. Head the ship, therefore, away from the island.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="277" unit="line"/>"The men were in despair at this, and
    Eurylokhos at once gave me an insolent answer. ‘Odysseus,’ said he, ‘you are
    cruel; you are very strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made
    of iron, and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep,
    you will not let them land and cook themselves a good supper upon this island,
    but bid them put out to sea and go faring fruitlessly on through the watches of
    the fleeing night. It is by night that the winds blow hardest and do so much
    damage; how can we escape should one of those sudden squalls spring up from
    South West or West, which so often wreck a vessel when our lords the gods are
    unpropitious? Now, therefore, let us obey the call of night and prepare our
    supper here hard by the ship; tomorrow morning we will go on board again and
    put out to sea.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="294" unit="line"/>"Thus spoke Eurylokhos, and the men approved
    his words. I saw that a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> meant us mischief
    and said, ‘You force me to yield, for you are many against one, but at any rate
    each one of you must take his solemn oath that if he meet with a herd of cattle
    or a large flock of sheep, he will not be so mad as to kill a single head of
    either, but will be satisfied with the food that Circe has given us.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="303" unit="line"/>"They all swore as I bade them, and when they
    had completed their oath we made the ship fast in a harbor that was near a
    stream of fresh water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. As
    soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about their
    poor comrades whom Scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set them weeping and
    they went on crying till they fell off into a sound sleep.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="312" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="312" unit="line"/>"In the third watch of the night when the stars
    had shifted their places, Zeus raised a great gale of wind that flew a gale so
    that land and sea were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out of
    the heavens. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, we
    brought the ship to land and drew her into a cave wherein the sea-nymphs hold
    their courts and dances [<term xml:lang="grc">khoros</term>], and I called the
    men together in council.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="320" unit="line"/>"‘My friends,’ said I, ‘we have meat and drink
    in the ship, let us mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall
    suffer for it; for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees
    and gives ear to everything. And again they promised that they would obey.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="325" unit="line"/>"For a whole month the wind blew steadily from
    the South, and there was no other wind, but only South and East. As long as
    grain and wine held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry;
    when, however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to go
    further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking whatever they
    could lay their hands on; for they were starving. One day, therefore, I went up
    inland that I might pray heaven to show me some means of getting away. When I
    had gone far enough to be clear of all my men, and had found a place that was
    well sheltered from the wind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in
    <placeName key="tgn,2109778">Olympus</placeName> till by and by they sent me
    off into a sweet sleep.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="339" unit="line"/>"Meanwhile Eurylokhos had been giving evil
    counsel to the men, ‘Listen to me,’ said he, ‘my poor comrades. All deaths are
    bad enough but there is none so bad as famine. Why should not we drive in the
    best of these cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods? If we ever
    get back to <placeName key="tgn,7013803">Ithaca</placeName>, we can build a
    fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it with every kind of ornament; if,
    however, he is determined to sink our ship out of revenge for these horned
    cattle, and the other gods are of the same mind, I for one would rather drink
    salt water once for all and have done with it, than be starved to death by
    inches in such a desert island as this is.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="352" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="352" unit="line"/>"Thus spoke Eurylokhos, and the men approved
    his words. Now the cattle, so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the
    ship; the men, therefore drove in the best of them, and they all stood round
    them saying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of barley-meal,
    for there was no barley left. When they had done praying they killed the cows
    and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the thigh bones, wrapped them round
    in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on top of them. They had
    no wine with which to make drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was
    cooking, so they kept pouring on a little water from time to time while the
    inward meats were being grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and
    they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces
    upon the spits.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="366" unit="line"/>"By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I
    turned back to the ship and to the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell
    hot roast meat, so I groaned out a prayer to the immortal gods. ‘Father Zeus,’
    I exclaimed, ‘and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, you have
    done me a cruel mischief [<term xml:lang="grc">atê</term>] by the sleep into
    which you have sent me; see what fine work these men of mine have been making
    in my absence.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="374" unit="line"/>"Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the
    sun and told him we had been killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great
    rage, and said to the immortals, ‘Father Zeus, and all you other gods who live
    in everlasting bliss, I must have vengeance on the crew of Odysseus’ ship: they
    have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing I loved to
    look upon, whether I was going up heaven or down again. If they do not square
    accounts with me about my cows, I will go down to Hades and shine there among
    the dead.’</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="384" unit="line"/>"‘Sun,’ said Zeus, ‘go on shining upon us gods
    and upon humankind over the fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into
    little pieces with a bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to
    sea.’</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="389" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="389" unit="line"/>"I was told all this by Calypso, who said she
    had heard it from the mouth of Hermes.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="391" unit="line"/>"As soon as I got down to my ship and to the
    sea shore I rebuked each one of the men separately, but we could see no way out
    of it, for the cows were dead already. And indeed the gods began at once to
    show signs and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and
    the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whether cooked
    or raw, kept on making a noise just as cows do.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="397" unit="line"/>"For six days my men kept driving in the best
    cows and feasting upon them, but when Zeus the son of Kronos had added a
    seventh day, the fury of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised
    our masts, spread sail, and put out to sea. As soon as we were well away from
    the island, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the son of Kronos raised a
    black cloud over our ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it. We did not get on
    much further, for in another moment we were caught by a terrific squall from
    the West that snapped the forestays of the mast so that it fell aft, while all
    the ship's gear tumbled about at the bottom of the vessel. The mast fell upon
    the head of the helmsman in the ship's stern, so that the bones of his head
    were crushed to pieces, and he fell overboard as though he were diving, with no
    more life left in him.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="415" unit="line"/>"Then Zeus let fly with his thunderbolts, and
    the ship went round and round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the
    lightning struck it. The men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in
    the water round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently
    deprived them of all chance of getting home again [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>].</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:12"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="420" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="420" unit="line"/>"I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her
    sides from her keel (which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of
    her in the direction of the keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong
    still hanging about it, and with this I lashed the mast and keel together, and
    getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to take me.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="426" unit="line"/>"The gale from the West had now spent its
    force, and the wind got into the South again, which frightened me lest I should
    be taken back to the terrible whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what
    actually happened, for I was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise
    had reached the rock of Scylla, and the whirlpool. She was then sucking down
    the salt sea water, but I was carried aloft toward the fig tree, which I caught
    hold of and clung on to like a bat. I could not plant my feet anywhere so as to
    stand securely, for the roots were a long way off and the boughs that
    overshadowed the whole pool were too high, too vast, and too far apart for me
    to reach them; so I hung patiently on, waiting till the pool should discharge
    my mast and raft again - and a very long while it seemed. A juryman [<term xml:lang="grc">krînô</term>] is not more glad to get home to supper, after
    having been long detained in court by troublesome cases, than I was to see my
    raft beginning to work its way out of the whirlpool again. At last I let go
    with my hands and feet, and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on to
    which I then got, and began to row with my hands. As for Scylla, the father of
    gods and men would not let her get further sight of me - otherwise I should
    have certainly been lost.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="447" unit="line"/>"Hence I was carried along for nine days till
    on the tenth night the gods stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the
    great and powerful goddess Calypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I
    need say no more about this, for I told you and your noble wife all about it
    yesterday, and it is hateful [<term xml:lang="grc">ekhthron</term>] for me to
    say the same thing over and over again." <milestone n="453" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

