+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="1" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="1" unit="line"/>Odysseus was left in the room, pondering on the
    means whereby with Athena's help he might be able to kill the suitors.
    Presently he said to Telemakhos, "Telemakhos, we must get the armor together
    and take it down inside. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have
    removed it. Say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke,
    inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Odysseus went away, but has become
    soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that you are
    afraid a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> may set them on to quarrel over
    their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both
    banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use
    them."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="14" unit="line"/>Telemakhos approved of what his father had said,
    so he called nurse Eurykleia and said, "Nurse, shut the women up in their room,
    while I take the armor that my father left behind him down into the store room.
    No one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got all smirched with
    soot during my own boyhood. I want to take it down where the smoke cannot reach
    it."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="21" unit="line"/>"I wish, child," answered Eurykleia, "that you
    would take the management of the house into your own hands altogether, and look
    after all the property yourself. But who is to go with you and light you to the
    store room? The maids would have so, but you would not let them.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="26" unit="line"/>"The stranger," said Telemakhos, "shall show me
    a light; when people eat my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come
    from."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="29" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="29" unit="line"/>Eurykleia did as she was told, and bolted the
    women inside their room. Then Odysseus and his son made all haste to take the
    helmets, shields, and spears inside; and Athena went before them with a gold
    lamp in her hand that shed a soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemakhos
    said, "Father, my eyes behold a great marvel: the walls, with the rafters,
    crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with a flaming
    fire. Surely there is some god here who has come down from heaven."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="41" unit="line"/>"Hush," answered Odysseus, "hold your <term xml:lang="grc">noos</term> in peace and ask no questions, for this is the
    manner [<term xml:lang="grc">dikê</term>] of the gods. Get you to your bed, and
    leave me here to talk with your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief
    will ask me all sorts of questions."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="47" unit="line"/>On this Telemakhos went by torch-light to the
    other side of the inner court, to the room in which he always slept. There he
    lay in his bed till morning, while Odysseus was left in the room pondering on
    the means whereby with Athena's help he might be able to kill the suitors.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="53" unit="line"/>Then Penelope came down from her room looking
    like Aphrodite or Artemis, and they set her a seat inlaid with scrolls of
    silver and ivory near the fire in her accustomed place. It had been made by
    Ikmalios and had a footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was
    covered with a thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from the
    women's room to join her. They set about removing the tables at which the
    wicked suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that was left, with the
    cups from which they had drunk. They emptied the embers out of the braziers,
    and heaped much wood upon them to give both light and heat; but Melantho began
    to rail at Odysseus a second time and said, "Stranger, do you mean to plague us
    by hanging about the house all night and spying upon the women? Be off, you
    wretch, outside, and eat your supper there, or you shall be driven out with a
    firebrand."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="70" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="70" unit="line"/>Odysseus scowled at her and answered, "My good
    woman, why should you be so angry with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my
    clothes are all in rags, and because I am obliged to go begging about the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> after the manner of tramps and beggars general?
    I too was a rich [<term xml:lang="grc">olbios</term>] man once, and had a fine
    house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no
    matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and
    all the other things which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy,
    but it pleased Zeus to take all away from me; therefore, woman, beware lest you
    too come to lose that pride and place in which you now wanton above your
    fellows; have a care lest you get out of favor with your mistress, and lest
    Odysseus should come home, for there is still a chance that he may do so.
    Moreover, though he be dead as you think he is, yet by Apollo's will he has
    left a son behind him, Telemakhos, who will note anything done amiss by the
    maids in the house, for he is now no longer in his boyhood."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="89" unit="line"/>Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded
    the maid, "Impudent baggage," said she, "I see how abominably you are behaving,
    and you shall smart for it. You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself,
    that I was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for whose
    sake I am in such continual sorrow."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="96" unit="line"/>Then she said to her head waiting woman
    Eurynome, "Bring a seat with a fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon
    while he tells his story, and listens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him
    some questions."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="100" unit="line"/>Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a
    fleece upon it, and as soon as Odysseus had sat down Penelope began by saying,
    "Stranger, I shall first ask you who and whence are you? Tell me of your town
    and parents."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="106" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="106" unit="line"/>"Lady;" answered Odysseus, "who on the face of
    the whole earth can dare to chide with you? Your fame [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] reaches the firmament of heaven itself; you are like some
    blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the monarch over a great and
    valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and barley, the trees are loaded
    with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs, and the sea abounds with fish by reason
    of his virtues, and his people do good deeds under him. Nevertheless, as I sit
    here in your house, ask me some other question and do not seek to know my race
    and family, or you will recall memories that will yet more increase my sorrow.
    I am full of heaviness, but I ought not to sit weeping and wailing in another
    person's house, nor is it well to be thus grieving continually. I shall have
    one of the servants or even yourself complaining of me, and saying that my eyes
    swim with tears because I am heavy with wine."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="123" unit="line"/>Then Penelope answered, "Stranger, the immortal
    gods robbed me of all <term xml:lang="grc">aretê</term>, whether of face or
    figure, when the Argives set sail for <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> and my dear husband with them. If he were to return and
    look after my affairs I should be both more respected [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] and should show a better presence to the world. As it is, I
    am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> has seen fit to heap upon me. The chiefs from all our islands
    - Dulichium, Same, and <placeName key="tgn,7011374">Zacynthus</placeName>, as
    also from <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> itself, are wooing me
    against my will and are wasting my estate. I can therefore show no attention to
    strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who say that they are skilled
    artisans, but am all the time brokenhearted about Odysseus. They want me to
    marry again at once, and I have to invent stratagems in order to deceive them.
    In the first place a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> put it in my mind to
    set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and to begin working upon an enormous
    piece of fine needlework. Then I said to them, ‘Sweethearts, Odysseus is indeed
    dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately; wait - for I would not
    have my skill in needlework perish unrecorded - till I have finished making a
    shroud for the hero <placeName key="perseus,Laertes">Laertes</placeName>, to be
    ready against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the
    women of the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> will talk if he is laid out
    without a shroud.’ This was what I said, and they assented; whereon I used to
    keep working at my great web all day long, but at night I would unpick the
    stitches again by torch light. I fooled them in this way for three years
    without their finding it out, but as time [<term xml:lang="grc">hôra</term>]
    wore on and I was now in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days
    had been accomplished, those good-for-nothing hussies my maids betrayed me to
    the suitors, who broke in upon me and caught me; they were very angry with me,
    so I was forced to finish my work whether I would or no. And now I do not see
    how I can find any further shift for getting out of this marriage. My parents
    are putting great pressure upon me, and my son chafes at the ravages the
    suitors are making upon his estate, for he is now old enough to understand all
    about it and is perfectly able to look after his own affairs, for heaven has
    blessed him with an excellent disposition. Still, notwithstanding all this,
    tell me who you are and where you come from - for you must have had father and
    mother of some sort; you cannot be the son of an oak or of a rock."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="164" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus answered, "Lady, wife of
    Odysseus, since you persist in asking me about my family, I will answer, no
    matter what it costs me: people must expect to be pained [<term xml:lang="grc">akhos</term>] when they have been exiles as long as I have, and suffered as
    much among as many peoples. Nevertheless, as regards your question I will tell
    you all you ask. There is a fair and fruitful island in mid-ocean called
    <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName>; it is thickly peopled and
    there are nine cities in it: the people speak many different languages which
    overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, brave Eteocretans, Dorians of
    three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi. There is a great town there, <placeName key="perseus,Knossos">Knossos</placeName>, where Minos reigned who every
    nine years had a conference with Zeus himself. Minos was father to Deukalion,
    whose son I am, for Deukalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneus
    sailed for <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, and I, who am the
    younger, am called Aithon; my brother, however, was at once the older and the
    more valiant of the two; hence it was in <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName> that I saw Odysseus and showed him hospitality, for the
    winds took him there as he was on his way to <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName>, carrying him out of his course from cape Malea and
    leaving him in <placeName key="perseus,Amnisos">Amnisos</placeName> off the
    cave of Eileithuia, where the harbors are difficult to enter and he could
    hardly find shelter from the winds that were then raging. As soon as he got
    there he went into the town and asked for Idomeneus, claiming to be his old and
    valued friend, but Idomeneus had already set sail for <placeName key="perseus,Troy">Troy</placeName> some ten or twelve days earlier, so I
    took him to my own house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for I had
    abundance of everything. Moreover, I fed the men who were with him with barley
    meal from the public store, and got subscriptions of wine and oxen for them to
    sacrifice to their heart's content. They stayed with me twelve days, for there
    was a gale blowing from the North so strong that one could hardly keep one's
    feet on land. I suppose some unfriendly <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> had
    raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day the wind dropped, and they got
    away."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="203" unit="line"/>Many a plausible tale did Odysseus further tell
    her, and Penelope wept as she listened, for her heart was melted. As the snow
    wastes upon the mountain tops when the winds from South East and West have
    breathed upon it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even
    so did her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the time
    sitting by her side. Odysseus felt for her and was for her, but he kept his
    eyes as hard as or iron without letting them so much as quiver, so cunningly
    did he restrain his tears. Then, when she had relieved herself by weeping, she
    turned to him again and said: "Now, stranger, I shall put you to the test and
    see whether or not you really did entertain my husband and his men, as you say
    you did. Tell me, then, how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look
    at, and so also with his companions."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="220" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="220" unit="line"/>"Lady," answered Odysseus, "it is such a long
    time ago that I can hardly say. Twenty years are come and gone since he left my
    home, and went elsewhere; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect.
    Odysseus wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened by a
    gold brooch with two catches for the pin. On the face of this there was a
    device that showed a dog holding a spotted fawn between his fore paws, and
    watching it as it lay panting upon the ground. Every one marveled at the way in
    which these things had been done in gold, the dog looking at the fawn, and
    strangling it, while the fawn was struggling convulsively to escape. As for the
    shirt that he wore next his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the
    skin of an onion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the
    women who beheld it. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, that I
    do not know whether Odysseus wore these clothes when he left home, or whether
    one of his companions had given them to him while he was on his voyage; or
    possibly some one at whose house he was staying made him a present of them, for
    he was a man of many friends and had few equals among the Achaeans. I myself
    gave him a sword of bronze and a beautiful purple mantle, double lined, with a
    shirt that went down to his feet, and I sent him on board his ship with every
    mark of honor. He had a servant with him, a little older than himself, and I
    can tell you what he was like; his shoulders were hunched, he was dark, and he
    had thick curly hair. His name was Eurybates, and Odysseus treated him with
    greater familiarity than he did any of the others, as being the most
    like-minded with himself."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="249" unit="line"/>Penelope was moved still more deeply as she
    heard the indisputable proofs [<term xml:lang="grc">sêmata</term>] that
    Odysseus laid before her; and when she had again found relief in tears she said
    to him, "Stranger, I was already disposed to pity you, but henceforth you shall
    be honored and made welcome in my house. It was I who gave Odysseus the clothes
    you speak of. I took them out of the store room and folded them up myself, and
    I gave him also the gold brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! I shall never
    welcome him home again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set out for that
    detested city whose very name I cannot bring myself even to mention."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="261" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus answered, "Lady, wife of
    Odysseus, do not disfigure yourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your
    loss, though I can hardly blame you for doing so. A woman who has loved her
    husband and borne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even
    though he were a worse man than Odysseus, who they say was like a god. Still,
    cease your tears and listen to what I can tell. I will hide nothing from you,
    and can say with perfect truth that I have lately heard of Odysseus as being
    alive and on his way home [<term xml:lang="grc">nostos</term>]; he is in the
    district [<term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>] of the Thesprotians, and is
    bringing back much valuable treasure that he has begged from one and another of
    them; but his ship and all his crew were lost as they were leaving the
    Thrinacian island, for Zeus and the sun-god were angry with him because his men
    had slaughtered the sun-god's cattle, and they were all drowned to a man. But
    Odysseus stuck to the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the
    Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him as though
    he had been a god, giving him many presents, and wishing to escort him home
    safe and sound. In fact Odysseus would have been here long ago, had he not
    thought better to go from land to land gathering wealth; for there is no man
    living who is so wily [<term xml:lang="grc">kerdos</term>] as he is; there is
    no one can compare with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all this,
    and he swore to me - making drink-offerings in his house as he did so - that
    the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would take Odysseus to
    his own country. He sent me off first, for there happened to be a Thesprotian
    ship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, but he showed me all
    the treasure Odysseus had got together, and he had enough lying in the house of
    king Pheidon to keep his family for ten generations; but the king said Odysseus
    had gone to <placeName key="perseus,Dodona">Dodona</placeName> that he might
    learn Zeus’ mind from the high oak tree, and know whether after so long an
    absence he should return to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName>
    openly or in secret. So you may know he is safe and will be here shortly; he is
    close at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer; nevertheless I will
    confirm my words with an oath, and call Zeus who is the first and mightiest of
    all gods to witness, as also that hearth of Odysseus to which I have now come,
    that all I have spoken shall surely come to pass. Odysseus will return in this
    self same year; with the end of this moon and the beginning of the next he will
    be here."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="308" unit="line"/>"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if
    your words come true you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that
    all who see you shall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be.
    Odysseus will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely
    as that Odysseus ever was, there are now no longer any such masters in the
    house as he was, to receive honorable strangers or to further them on their way
    home. And now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and make him a bed on a couch
    with rugs and blankets, that he may be warm and quiet till morning. Then, at
    day break wash him and anoint him again, that he may sit in the room and take
    his meals with Telemakhos. It shall be the worse for any one of these hateful
    people who is uncivil to him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do in
    this house. For how, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or no I am
    superior to others of my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>], if I let you dine in my cloisters squalid and
    ill clad? Men live but for a little season; if they are hard, and deal hardly,
    people wish them ill so long as they are alive, and speak contemptuously of
    them when they are dead, but he that is righteous and deals righteously, the
    people tell of his praise [<term xml:lang="grc">kleos</term>] among all lands,
    and many shall call him blessed."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="335" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="335" unit="line"/>Odysseus answered, "Lady, I have foresworn rugs
    and blankets from the day that I left the snowy ranges of <placeName key="tgn,7012056">Crete</placeName> to go on shipboard. I will lie as I have
    lain on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night after night have I passed in any
    rough sleeping place, and waited for morning. Nor, again, do I like having my
    feet washed; I shall not let any of the young hussies about your house touch my
    feet; but, if you have any old and respectable woman who has gone through as
    much trouble as I have, I will allow her to wash them."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="349" unit="line"/>To this Penelope said, "My dear sir, of all the
    guests who ever yet came to my house there never was one who spoke in all
    things with such admirable propriety as you do. There happens to be in the
    house a most respectable old woman - the same who received my poor dear husband
    in her arms the night he was born, and nursed him in infancy. She is very
    feeble now, but she shall wash your feet. Come here," said she, "Eurykleia, and
    wash your master's age-mate; I suppose Odysseus’ hands and feet are very much
    the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of us dreadfully fast."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="361" unit="line"/>On these words the old woman covered her face
    with her hands; she began to weep and made lamentation saying, "My dear child,
    I cannot think whatever I am to do with you. I am certain no one was ever more
    god-fearing than yourself, and yet Zeus hates you. No one in the whole world
    ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs when you prayed
    you might come to a green old age yourself and see your son grow up to take
    after you; yet see how he has prevented you alone from ever getting back to
    your own home. I have no doubt the women in some foreign palace which Odysseus
    has got to are gibing at him as all these sluts here have been gibing you. I do
    not wonder at your not choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which
    they have insulted you; I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelope
    has said that I am to do so; I will wash them both for Penelope's sake and for
    your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings of compassion in my
    mind; and let me say this moreover, which pray attend to; we have had all kinds
    of strangers in distress come here before now, but I make bold to say that no
    one ever yet came who was so like Odysseus in figure, voice, and feet as you
    are."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="382" unit="line"/>"Those who have seen us both," answered
    Odysseus, "have always said we were wonderfully like each other, and now you
    have noticed it too.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="386" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="386" unit="line"/>Then the old woman took the cauldron in which
    she was going to wash his feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding
    hot till the bath was warm enough. Odysseus sat by the fire, but ere long he
    turned away from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had
    hold of his leg she would recognize a certain scar which it bore, whereon the
    whole truth would come out. And indeed as soon as she began washing her master,
    she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him by a wild boar when he
    was hunting on Mount Parnassus with his excellent grandfather Autolykos - who
    was the most accomplished thief and perjurer in the whole world - and with the
    sons of Autolykos. Hermes himself had endowed him with this gift, for he used
    to burn the thigh bones of goats and kids to him, so he took pleasure in his
    companionship. It happened once that Autolykos had gone to the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term> of <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> and had found the child of his daughter just born. As
    soon as he had done supper Eurykleia set the infant upon his knees and said,
    "You must find a name for your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have
    one."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="406" unit="line"/>‘Son-in-law and daughter," replied Autolykos,
    "call the child thus: I am highly displeased with a large number of people in
    one place and another, both men and women; so name the child ‘Odysseus,’ or the
    child of anger. When he grows up and comes to visit his mother's family on
    Mount <placeName key="tgn,7011022">Parnassus</placeName>, where my possessions
    lie, I will make him a present and will send him on his way rejoicing."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="413" unit="line"/>Odysseus, therefore, went to <placeName key="tgn,7011022">Parnassus</placeName> to get the presents from Autolykos,
    who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome. His grandmother
    Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his head, and both his beautiful
    eyes, while Autolykos desired his sons to get dinner ready, and they did as he
    told them. They brought in a five year old bull, flayed it, made it ready and
    divided it into joints; these they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces
    and spitted them; they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round.
    Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and
    every man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the sun set
    and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of sleep.</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="426" unit="line"/>When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
    appeared, the sons of Autolykos went out with their hounds hunting, and
    Odysseus went too. They climbed the wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached
    its breezy upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the
    fields, fresh-risen from the slow still currents of Okeanos, they came to a
    mountain dell. The dogs were in front searching for the tracks of the beast
    they were chasing, and after them came the sons of Autolykos, among whom was
    Odysseus, close behind the dogs, and he had a long spear in his hand. Here was
    the lair of a huge boar among some thick brushwood, so dense that the wind and
    rain could not get through it, nor could the sun's rays pierce it, and the
    ground underneath lay thick with fallen leaves. The boar heard the noise of the
    men's feet, and the hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him,
    so rushed from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay with
    fire flashing from his eyes. Odysseus was the first to raise his spear and try
    to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quick for him, and charged him
    sideways, ripping him above the knee with a gash that tore deep though it did
    not reach the bone. As for the boar, Odysseus hit him on the right shoulder,
    and the point of the spear went right through him, so that he fell groaning in
    the dust until the life went out of him. The sons of Autolykos busied
    themselves with the carcass of the boar, and bound Odysseus’ wound; then, after
    saying a spell to stop the bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. But
    when Autolykos and his sons had thoroughly healed Odysseus, they made him some
    splendid presents, and sent him back to <placeName key="tgn,1007519">Ithaca</placeName> with much mutual good will. When he got back, his father
    and mother were rejoiced to see him, and asked him all about it, and how he had
    hurt himself to get the scar; so he told them how the boar had ripped him when
    he was out hunting with Autolykos and his sons on Mount Parnassus.</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="467" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="467" unit="line"/>As soon as Eurykleia had got the scarred limb
    in her hands and had well hold of it, she recognized it and dropped the foot at
    once. The leg fell into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that
    all the water was spilt on the ground; Eurykleia's eyes between her joy and her
    grief filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caught Odysseus by
    the beard and said, "My dear child, I am sure you must be Odysseus himself,
    only I did not know you till I had actually touched and handled you."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="476" unit="line"/>As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as
    though wanting to tell her that her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope
    was unable to look in that direction and observe what was going on, for Athena
    had diverted her attention [<term xml:lang="grc">noos</term>]; so Odysseus
    caught Eurykleia by the throat with his right hand and with his left drew her
    close to him, and said, "Nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who
    nursed me at your own breast, now that after twenty years of wandering I am at
    last come to my own home again? Since it has been borne in upon you by heaven
    to recognize me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word about it any one else
    in the house, for if you do I tell you - and it shall surely be - that if
    heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors, I will not spare you,
    though you are my own nurse, when I am killing the other women."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="491" unit="line"/>"My child," answered Eurykleia, "what are you
    talking about? You know very well that nothing can either bend or break me. I
    will hold my tongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say,
    and lay my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into
    your hand, I will give you a list of the women in the house who have been
    ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="499" unit="line"/>And Odysseus answered, "Nurse, you ought not to
    speak in that way; I am well able to form my own opinion about one and all of
    them; hold your tongue and leave everything to heaven."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="503" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="503" unit="line"/>As he said this Eurykleia left the room to
    fetch some more water, for the first had been all spilt; and when she had
    washed him and anointed him with oil, Odysseus drew his seat nearer to the fire
    to warm himself, and hid the scar under his rags. Then Penelope began talking
    to him and said:</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="509" unit="line"/>"Stranger, I should like to speak with you
    briefly about another matter. It is indeed nearly bed time - for those, at
    least, who can sleep in spite of sorrow. As for myself, a <term xml:lang="grc">daimôn</term> has given me a life of such unmeasurable woe [<term xml:lang="grc">penthos</term>], that even by day when I am attending to my
    duties and looking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting during
    the whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lie awake
    thinking, and my heart becomes prey to the most incessant and cruel tortures.
    As the dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings in the early spring from
    her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many a plaintive trill pours out the
    tale how by mishap she killed her own child Itylos, son of king Zethos, even so
    does my mind toss and turn in its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my
    son here, and safeguard my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my
    house, out of regard to the opinion of the <term xml:lang="grc">dêmos</term>
    and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is not now time for me to go
    with the best of these suitors who are wooing me and making me such magnificent
    presents. As long as my son was still young, and unable to understand, he would
    not hear of my leaving my husband's house, but now that he is full grown he
    begs and prays me to do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are
    eating up his property. Listen, then, to a dream that I have had and interpret
    it for me if you can. I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out of
    a trough, and of which I am exceedingly fond. I dreamed that a great eagle came
    swooping down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak into the neck of each of
    them till he had killed them all. Presently he soared off into the sky, and
    left them lying dead about the yard; whereon I wept in my room till all my
    maids gathered round me, so piteously was I grieving because the eagle had
    killed my geese. Then he came back again, and perching on a projecting rafter
    spoke to me with human voice, and told me to leave off crying. ‘Be of good
    courage,’ he said, ‘daughter of Ikarios; this is no dream, but a vision of good
    omen that shall surely come to pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am no
    longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who will
    bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.’ On this I woke, and when I looked
    out I saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as usual."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="554" unit="line"/>"This dream, lady," replied Odysseus, "can
    admit but of one interpretation, for had not Odysseus himself told you how it
    shall be fulfilled? The death of the suitors is portended, and not one single
    one of them will escape."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="559" unit="line"/>And Penelope answered, "Stranger, dreams are
    very curious and unaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably
    come true. There are two gates through which these insubstantial fancies
    proceed; the one is of horn, and the other ivory. Those that come through the
    gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn mean something to
    those that see them. I do not think, however, that my own dream came through
    the gate of horn, though I and my son should be most thankful if it proves to
    have done so. Furthermore I say - and lay my saying to your heart - the coming
    dawn will usher in the ill-omened day that is to sever me from the house of
    Odysseus, for I am about to hold a tournament [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>] of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes in the court,
    one in front of the other, like the stays upon which a ship is built; he would
    then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the whole twelve. I shall
    make the suitors try to perform the same feat [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], and whichever of them can string the bow most easily, and
    send his arrow through all the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit this
    house of my lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. But even so,
    I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams."</p>
    </div>

+++
urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002.perseus-eng4:19"
title: "The _Odyssey_ of Homer"
authors:
- trans. Samuel Butler- revised by Timothy Power and Gregory Nagy
+++

<div type="textpart" n="582" subtype="card">
    <p>
    <milestone n="582" unit="line"/>Then Odysseus answered, "my lady wife of
    Odysseus, you need not defer your tournament [<term xml:lang="grc">athlos</term>], for Odysseus will return ere ever they can string the bow,
    handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="588" unit="line"/>To this Penelope said, "As long, sir, as you
    will sit here and talk to me, I can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people
    cannot do permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on
    earth a time for all things. I will therefore go upstairs and recline upon that
    couch which I have never ceased to flood with my tears from the day Odysseus
    set out for the city with a hateful name."</p>

    <p>
    <milestone n="600" unit="line"/>She then went upstairs to her own room, not
    alone, but attended by her maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear
    husband till Athena shed sweet sleep over her eyelids. <milestone n="604" unit="line"/>
    </p>
    </div>

