+++

tags:
- "apo koinou"
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Odyssey"
- "melein &#39;be-on-one&#39;s mind&#39;"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.9.19-9.20.9Nh5LJw"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:9.19-9.20"
title: "Odyssey 9.019-020"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>εἴμ’ Ὀδυσεὺς Λαερτιάδης, ὃς πᾶσι δόλοισιν | ἀνθρώποισι μέλω, καί μευ κλέος οὐρανὸν ἵκει.</p><p>I am Odysseus son of Laertes, and I, with all [πᾶσι] my acts of trickery, | I-am-on-the-minds-of [<em>melein</em> (μέλω)] all (πᾶσι) humans, and my glory [<em>kleos</em>] reaches all the way up to the sky.</p><p>(Epitomized from Nagy 2016.02.11§§4–7.) Here at O.09.019–020, Homeric poetry is channeling Odysseus in the act of starting to tell his own story. The wording begins by saying at O.09.019 that I, Odysseus, am linked with ‘all’ (πᾶσι) my acts of trickery, and only then, at O.09.020, does the wording go on to say that ‘I-am-on-the-minds-of’ (μέλω) humans—but now the idea that these humans are ‘all’ (πᾶσι) humans in the universe has to be carried over from the previous line, O.09.019. What we see here is a construction known in ancient rhetoric as <em>apo koinou</em> (ἀπὸ κοινοῦ) ‘by way of shared application’, where a word is applied consecutively to two different syntactical situations. (In 2016.02.11§4, I cite an example in Sappho Song 1 lines 7–8). In the Homeric example that we are now considering, O.09.019–020, the adjective <em>pāsi</em> (πᾶσι) meaning ‘all’ applies first only to the noun <em>doloisi</em> (δόλοισι) meaning ‘acts of trickery’ at line 19, but then at line 20 it applies also—and in a different syntactical situation—to the noun <em>anthrōpoisi</em> (ἀνθρώποισι) meaning ‘humans’. This way, the meaning ‘all’ applies to two different words belonging to two different syntactical situations. And the application of the meaning is consecutive: first, I am linked with ‘all my acts of trickery’, and then, second, I am on the minds of ‘all humans’. The verb <em>melein</em>, which I translate here with the wording ‘be-on-one’s-mind’, normally has as its grammatical subject whatever is on the mind of someone. In everyday contexts, what is on the mind of someone is incidental: someone happens to be thinking about something, and so that something is on the mind of that someone. In Homeric contexts, however, whatever is on someone’s mind is special and worthy of being recorded in poetry. Here is a striking example: when Andromache in the <em>Iliad</em> says to Hector that she is thinking thoughts about the uncertain future that awaits her and the child they had together, he remarks that ‘all these things are-on-my-mind [<em>melei</em>] as well’, I.06.441: ἦ καὶ ἐμοὶ τάδε πάντα μέλει. Such things are the subject of Homeric poetry, and so Homer must have such things on his mind as well. In poetic as also in prosaic contexts, the things that are on someone’s mind may be simply things that this someone is thinking about. But they may be more than that, as in the example I just gave concerning the things that are on the minds of Andromache and Hector. And these things are not just thoughts: they are caring thoughts, concerned thoughts, even worried thoughts. A word that refers to a song about such worried thoughts, as an expression of caring and concern, is <em>merimna</em> ‘care’, as used in the <em>Hippolytus</em> of Euripides, with reference to a custom originating in the city of Trozen, where girls who were celebrating their coming of age are seen in the act of singing and dancing a song. Their song is described as a sad love song, ‘a troubled thought that comes along with songmaking’ (μουσοποιὸς … μέριμνα 1428–1429). The noun that I translate here as ‘a troubled thought’ is <em>merimna</em>, which means literally a ‘care’ or a ‘concern’. A <em>merimna</em>, in other words, is what you have on your mind. In a song of Bacchylides (19.11), the same noun <em>merimna</em>, which I translate here as ‘a troubled thought’, refers to the thought-processes of the poet himself as he is pictured in the act of composing his song. A <em>merimna</em>, then, is a song that is ‘on one’s mind’. Similarly, I argue, the noun <em>melos</em> in the sense of ‘melody’ is derived from <em>melei</em> ‘is on one’s mind’; a <em>melos</em> is a song that is ‘on one’s mind’. Further examples in Nagy 2016.02.11§7. </p>