+++

tags:
- "kharis"
- "Reciprocal exchange"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Odyssey.4.687-4.695.Hoz2Dno"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg002:4.687-4.695"
title: "Odyssey 4.687-695"

authors:
- email: "nikkanen@fas.harvard.edu"
  name: "Anita Nikkanen"
  username: "anikkanen"
+++

<p>This speech by Penelope echoes the themes of those of Telemakhos and Mentor in O.2.63-79, O.2.229-241. When she asks her rhetorical question of whether the suitors listened to their parents tell of Odysseus, Penelope maintains, like Mentor, that it is ignorance or forgetfulness of Odysseus’ kindness as a ruler that explains the suitors’ arrogance. <em>ἀκούετε</em> (O.4.688), “you (pl.) hear,” here corresponds to a function of <em>mimnēskomai</em>, ‘remember’, when the latter denotes the performance of <em>klea andrōn</em>, epic songs about the glory of men: as <em>mimnēskomai</em> marks the activity of the bard, <em>akouō</em>, ‘hear’, is what the audience would do. The applicability of this constellation of concepts to the present passage is supported by Penelope’s insistence that Odysseus’ actions in the past were not only praiseworthy, but in fact also the subject of discourse – we can picture the suitors’ parents performing <em>klea andrōn</em>, specifically the <em>kleos</em> of Odysseus.</p><p>She also echoes Mentor, as well as Telemakhos, when she spells out that the suitors’ behavior is no fitting return for Odysseus’ treatment of his fellow men, and that the appropriate kind of reciprocation is manifestly not to be had (O.4.693-695). Where she differs from Mentor and Telemakhos, however, is in articulating the idea of reciprocity by using the term <em>kharis</em>, which here could be translated as ‘gratitude’, though its range of meanings is wider. In her speech, then, a connection is drawn between memory and reciprocity, specifically reciprocity denoted by <em>kharis </em>(see O.22.318-319 and my note there on the conventionality of the idea that good deeds deserve good <em>kharis </em>in return, and when that does not happen, the social system is being perverted).</p><p>Looking at how Telemakhos’, Mentor’s, and Penelope’s speeches converge on a topic but use different vocabulary to articulate what is involved makes apparent the connections between these key terms. We perceive the parallelism of <em>mēnis</em> and memory and their association with reciprocity in Telemakhos’ and Mentor’s speeches on the one hand, and the connection between memory and reciprocity denoted by <em>kharis </em>in particular in Penelope’s on the other. In addition, just as we can see that memory and <em>mēnis</em> are closely linked to <em>themis</em>, proper conduct, and upholding the cosmos (e.g. in Telemakhos’ speech in O.2), so the social role of <em>kharis</em>, especially as a force for or indication of proper social order (as in Penelope’s speech here), fits well in this network of concepts. Indeed, since the reciprocation of <em>kharites</em> (plural of <em>kharis</em>) is intended to establish a stable relationship with benefits to both parties, it appears to create an effect similar to that of the fear of <em>mēnis</em> or the positive guidance of memory. Just as <em>mēnis</em> and memory work to maintain the existing world order, so relationships of <em>kharis</em> are a further manifestation of the stability of the cosmos (see further O.24.281-286 and my note there on the connections between <em>kharis</em> and <em>themis</em>). Furthermore, a relationship of <em>kharis</em> involves memory (cp. e.g. dedications such as CEG 332 calling themselves <em>mnāma</em>), which can, in part, explain its similarity – or its kinship – to the purposes of <em>mēnis</em> and memory. The ideal of a remembering relationship of <em>kharis</em> as a manifestation of good behavior, however, is the opposite of what Penelope is talking about: in the scenario she describes, there is no <em>kharis</em>, no good conduct, and no memory of Odysseus. Compare Hesiod <em>Works and Days</em> 182-194 on the disruption of social order, proper reciprocal relationships and lack of <em>kharis</em>.</p><p>See further:</p><p>CEG = Hansen, P. A. 1983. <em>Carmina Epigraphica Graeca saeculorum viii-v a. Chr. n.</em> Berlin: de Gruyter.</p><p>MacLachlan, Bonnie. 1993. <em>The Age of Grace: Charis in Early Greek Poetry</em>. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.</p><p>Nagy, Gregory. 1974. <em>Comparative Studies in Greek and Indic Meter</em>. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. (pp. 244-246 on akouō, ‘hear’, as specifically a verb applied in Homeric diction to the hearing of kleos)</p>