+++

tags:
- "A Sampling of Comments on the Iliad"
- "Gates of Hadēs"
- "Hādēs"
- "Ōkeanos"
- "entombment"
- "cremation"
- "psūkhē &#39;spirit&#39;"
- "gates of the Sun"

citable_urn: "urn:cts:CHS:Commentaries.AHCIP:Iliad.23.71-23.76.FPCkSfK"
target_urn: "urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:23.71-23.76"
title: "Iliad 23.071–076/ anchor comment on: what the psūkhē ‘spirit’ of Patroklos really wants for itself—and for Achilles"

authors:
- email: "gnagy@chs.harvard.edu"
  name: "Gregory Nagy"
  username: "gnagy"
+++

<p>On the surface, what the <em>psūkhē</em> ‘spirit’ of Patroklos wants is a proper funeral for the corpse of Patroklos. But what does the <em>psūkhē</em> really want for itself? I ask the question this way in order to highlight a basic fact about the use of the word <em>psūkhē</em> in Homeric diction: as a disembodied conveyor of identity after death, the <em>psūkhē</em> is distinct from the body once the body is no longer alive. In view of this distinction, the answer to the question I just posed is partly evident—but also partly mystical. Here is my formulation of the answer: what the <em>psūkhē</em> really wants for itself is to be reunited with the body, and such a reunion must be achieved by way of a proper funeral. The part that is mystical about this formulation is the fact that the very idea of a proper funeral is a ritual construct that fits the mythological construct of the <em>psūkhē</em>. The ritual must be done right, and then the myth of the <em>psūkhē</em> will turn out to be right. So, it is imperative for Achilles to get things right in preparing a proper funeral for Patroklos. And how will Achilles make sure that the funeral of Patroklos is a proper funeral? Most important, there must be a ritually correct entombment, I.23.071, and a vital part of this entombment will be the actual cremation of the corpse, I.23.070–071 / I.23.076. Before cremation of the corpse, the <em>psūkhē</em> as a ‘spirit’ that used to belong to the body will be haunting the world of the living, but, after cremation, there will be no more haunting, I.23.075–076. So, what will happen to the <em>psūkhē</em> after cremation of the body? It is often assumed by readers of these verses at I.23.071-076 that the <em>psūkhē</em> as ‘spirit’, once the body is cremated, will now simply join the other <em>psūkhai</em> or ‘spirits’ who are already in Hādēs, and that will be the end of that. But the original Greek wording does not say that. In my opinion, what it really says gets misunderstood. What follows is a reinterpretation of I.23.071–076, divided into ten points:</p><p>Point 1. I start with evidence from Homeric poetry about the underworld known as Hādēs. I argue that Hādēs is a zone of transition for the <em>psūkhē</em> ‘spirit’ as it journeys from the Far West to the Far East. In this mystical zone, <em>psūkhai</em> can get lost along the underworld pathways leading from west to east, and then they will wander around, but they can also find the way, and, from the very start, the right way can be achieved by way of cremation. There will be much more to say about Hādēs in comments on the <em>Odyssey</em>. For now, however, it is enough to say at least this much more on the basis of the internal evidence of I.23.071–076: without a proper cremation and entombment, the <em>psūkhē</em> of Patroklos will not achieve safe passage through Hādēs. I make a special point here of saying <em>through</em> Hādēs and not <em>to</em> Hādēs. As I will argue further in comments on the <em>Odyssey</em>, Homeric poetry treats Hādēs as something that is <em>transitional</em>, not <em>eschatological</em>. In the Iliadic passage that is now being analyzed, I.23.071–076, even the <em>psūkhē</em> ‘spirit’ is something that is ultimately transitional in its own right.</p><p>Point 2. At I.23.073, it is said that the <em>psūkhē</em> ‘spirit’ of Patroklos is not allowed by the other <em>psūkhai</em> ‘spirits’ to join them ‘on-the-other-side-of [<em>huper</em>] the river [<em>potamos</em>]’ (ὑπὲρ ποταμοῖο), and that is why it is then said at I.23.074 that the <em>psūkhē</em> of Patroklos is left to wander all over the realm of Hādēs. The point is, the <em>psūkhē</em> of Patroklos is already in Hādēs, wandering around, and thus his <em>psūkhē</em> is not being excluded from Hādēs by the other <em>psūkhai</em>. Rather, as I argue here, the <em>psūkhē</em> of Patroklos is being excluded from joining other <em>psūkhai</em> who are no longer wandering around in Hādēs.</p><p>Point 3. And why are these other <em>psūkhai</em> no longer wandering around? It is because they have already found the way to get to the other side of the <em>potamos</em> ‘river’, I.23.073. And what is ‘the river’ here? In terms of Homeric poetry, this river must be the world-enclircling fresh-water stream named Ōkeanos, which as we saw in the comment on I.07.421–423 is a boundary delimiting light from darkness, wakefulness from sleep, life from death. The sun rises from the Ōkeanos at sunrise in the Far East, as we see at I.07.421–423, just as it sets into it at sunset in the Far West, as we see at I.08.485–486. And the movement of the sun both into and out from the Ōkeanos in the Far West and in the Far East respectively is envisioned as a cosmic model for an alternation between darkness and light, between sleep and awakening, between death and revival from death. </p><p>Point 4. This model is most relevant to what is meant when the <em>psūkhē</em> ‘spirit’ of Patroklos says at I.23.073 that the other <em>psūkhai</em> ‘spirits’ do not allow his spirit to join them ‘on-the-other-side-of [<em>huper</em>] the river [<em>potamos</em>]’ (ὑπὲρ ποταμοῖο). In this case, I argue, the circular cosmic river Ōkeanos is imagined as separating the dead from the living in the Far East, where the sun rises, not in the Far West, where the sun sets.</p><p>Point 5. Correspondingly, the <em>pulai</em> ‘gates’ of Hādēs mentioned at I.23.071 are situated in the Far East, where the sun rises, not only in the Far West, where the sun sets. In support of this interpretation, I note that the <em>pulai</em> ‘gates’ of Hādēs at I.23.071 can be seen as a by-form of the <em>pulai</em> ‘gates’ of Hēlios the Sun, mentioned at I.24.012. See also the anchor comment at I.08.367 on: Gates of Hādēs. (Further analysis in GMP 225–226.)</p><p>Point 6. If, then, the Gates of Hādēs are the Gates of the Sun, then I can make more sense of what the <em>psūkhē</em> ‘spirit’of Patroklos is saying at I.23.071, where this spirit expresses its desire to pass through the Gates of Hādēs. I argue that the <em>psūkhē</em> of Patroklos here is seeking passage through the gates of Hādēs that are situated in the Far East, where the sun rises, not through the gates that are situated in the Far West, where the son sets. See also the anchor comment at I.08.367 on: Gates of Hādēs.</p><p>Point 7. Similarly, the <em>psūkhē</em> ‘spirit’ of Patroklos seeks to cross the world-encircling cosmic river in the Far East, not in the Far West. Whereas the other side of the river in the Far West is the zone of Hādēs from the standpoint of the living, the other side of the same river in the Far East is a mystical place beyond the zone of Hādēs—from the standpoint of the dead who are still wandering around in Hādēs but who seek a renewal of life. As the <em>psūkhē</em> of Patroklos says at I.23.074, his spirit is still wandering around in the zone of Hādēs. And that is because his body has not yet received the ritual of cremation, which as we will now see will lead to a recovery of life after death.</p><p>Point 8. The scenario that I have put together here is based not only on the internal evidence of the wording at I.23.071–076 and elsewhere in Homeric poetry. It is based also on the comparative evidence of cognate Indic traditions centering on rituals of cremation as correlated with myths about a recovery of life after death. There is a detailed survey in the essay “Patroklos, Concepts of Afterlife, and the Indic Triple Fire,” GMP 85–121 (the essentials can be found at pp. 87, 115–121). In terms of Indic ritual and myth, cremation leads to a reunion: once the cremation takes place, the spirit without body and the body without spirit can now be reunited, and, this way, the dead can now be revived after death. Further, such a revival results in the reunion of the revived dead with the already revived <em>pítṛ</em>-s or ‘ancestors’. It is most relevant to note here that the Indic word <em>pítṛ</em>- ‘ancestor’ is cognate with the Greek word <em>Patro</em>- in the name <em>Patrokléēs</em>, which means ‘he who has the glory [<em>kleos</em>] of the ancestors [<em>pateres</em>]’: thus the role of Patroklos in instructing Achilles about the vital importance of cremation is in and of itself a deeply traditional theme. </p><p>Point 9. On the basis of both the internal and the comparative evidence that I have assembled so far, my formulation about the the ritual of cremation as visualized in myth can now be extended. In this extended formulation, I start with a scenario that reconstructs the initial phase of what happens to the <em>psūkhē</em> after the body is successfully cremated:</p><p>After a successful cremation, the <em>psūkhē</em> will cease wandering around in  Hādēs and will now find its way out. The <em>psūkhē</em> will cross the world- encircling river in the Far East and pass through the Gates of Hādēs,  which are the Gates of the Sun, <em>just as the sun passes through these same  gates when it rises at sunrise</em>.  </p><p>Point 10. I now continue with a scenario that reconstructs the next phase of what happens to the <em>psūkhē</em> after the body is successfully cremated. In this case, I find no internal evidence in Homeric poetry, and so I turn to the comparative evidence of Vedic poetry in Indic traditions, which show at least the broad outlines. From here on, since I now rely primarily on the Indic comparanda, I will no longer say <em>psūkhē</em> but simply ‘spirit’, which can serve as an adequate translation for both the Greek word and the corresponding Indic word, <em>mánas</em>-. This Indic word refers to the breath of life that leaves the body at death and is destined to be mystically reintegrated with the body after cremation. That said, I resume the scenario: </p><p>After finding its way out of the lower world, the spirit follows the path of  the sun and joins the rising sun at sunrise, ascending into the skies and  seeking to be reunited there with the body. Meanwhile, the body has  already been vaporized by way of cremation, and its fumes ascend into  the skies, seeking to be reunited there with the spirit.  </p><p>Such a prospective reunion of spirit and body is the secret of immortalization after death, <em>and the key to that secret is the ritual of cremation</em>.  </p>